{{Redirect|VW|other uses|VW (disambiguation)}}
{{Refimprove|date=July 2017}}
{{About|Volkswagen Passenger Cars|the parent group|Volkswagen Group|Volkswagen vans,
trucks and buses|Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles}}
{{Infobox company
| name               = Volkswagen
| logo               = Volkswagen_logo.png
| logo_size          = 183px
| type               = [[Brand|Marque]]
| founder            = [[German Labor Front|German Labor Front (Deutsche
Arbeitsfront, DAF)]], [[Adolf Hitler]]
| area_served        = Worldwide
| key_people         = Herbert Diess ([[Chairman]] of the Board of Management of the
Volkswagen Passenger Cars brand)
| industry           = [[Automotive industry|Automotive]]
| products           = [[Automobile]]s
| production         = {{increase}}6.073 million units
| production_year    = 2016 annual report
| revenue            = {{decrease}}[[Euro|€]]105.651 billion
| revenue_year       = 2016 annual report
| net_income         = {{decrease}}€1.869 billion
| net_income_year    = 2016 annual report
| num_employees      = 626,715
| num_employees_year = end of 2016
| parent             = [[Volkswagen Group]]
| subsid             =
| slogan             =
| homepage           = [http://en.volkswagen.com/ volkswagen.com]
| intl               = yes
| foundation         = {{Start date and age|1937|05|28|df=y}}
| location_city      = [[Wolfsburg]]
| location_country   = Germany
}}
'''Volkswagen''' ({{IPA-de|ˈfɔlksˌvaːɡŋ̍}} - {{Audio|GT VW AG.ogg|listen}}), shortened
to '''VW''', is a German [[Automotive industry|automaker]] founded on May 28,
[[1937]] by the [[German Labour Front]] and headquartered in [[Wolfsburg]]. It is the
flagship [[Brand|marque]] of the [[Volkswagen Group]], the largest automaker by
worldwide sales in 2016.<ref>{{cite
web|url=https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/cars/2017/01/30/volkswagen-toyota-world-largest-automaker/97234320/|title=Volkswagen
passes Toyota as world's largest automaker despite scandal|work=USA
Today|author=Bomey, Nathan|date=30 January 2017|accessdate=20 June 2017}}</ref>

''Volkswagen'' is German for "people's car", and the company's current international
[[advertising slogan]] is just "Volkswagen".<ref>{{cite news |
url=http://qz.com/580701/volkswagens-new-slogan-is-a-lesson-in-humility/ | title='Das
Auto' No More - Volkswagen’s new slogan is a lesson in humility | work=[[Quartz
(publication)|Quartz]] | date=23 December 2015 | accessdate=13 January 2016 |
author=Rodriguez, Ashley}}</ref><ref>{{cite news |
url=https://www.reuters.com/article/us-volkswagen-emissions-communications-i-idUSKBN0U514L20151222
| title='Das Auto' no more: Volkswagen plans image offensive | work=[[Reuters]] |
date=22 December 2015 | accessdate=13 January 2016 | author=Cremer, Andreas |
location=[[Berlin]]}}</ref> [[American English]] pronunciation is approximately
"volks wagon" ({{Audio|GT Vokeswagon.ogg|listen}}).<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://forum.wordreference.com/threads/vw-pronunciation.310316/|title=VW
pronunciation|website=Forum.wordreference.com|accessdate=2017-07-24}}</ref>{{Better
source|reason=Source is an internet forum discussion.|date=August 2016}}

==History==
:''For vehicle timeline tables, see: [[Volkswagen (timeline)]].
{{advert section|date=July 2017}}
===1932–1938: People's Car project===
[[File:Porsche Typ12 Model Nuremberg crop.jpg|thumb|Model of [[Porsche]] Type 12
(Zündapp), Museum of Industrial Culture, [[Nuremberg]]]]
Volkswagen was originally established in 1937 by the [[German Labour Front]]
(Deutsche Arbeitsfront) in [[Berlin]].<ref name="chronicle">{{Cite
book|title=Volkswagen Chronicle |editor1=Manfred Grieger |editor2=Ulrike Gutzmann
|editor3=Dirk Schlinkert |publisher=Volkswagen AG |year=2008 |series=Historical Notes
|volume=7 |isbn=978-3-935112-11-6
|url=http://www.volkswagenag.com/vwag/vwcorp/info_center/en/publications/2008/05/chronicle.-bin.acq/qual-BinaryStorageItem.Single.File/HN7e_www2.pdf
|accessdate=21 December 2009 |deadurl=yes
|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20101216072143/http://www.volkswagenag.com/vwag/vwcorp/info_center/en/publications/2008/05/chronicle.-bin.acq/qual-BinaryStorageItem.Single.File/HN7e_www2.pdf
|archivedate=16 December 2010 }}</ref> In the early 1930s, the German auto industry
was still largely composed of luxury models, and the average German could rarely
afford anything more than a motorcycle. As a result, only one German out of 50 owned
a car.  Seeking a potential new market, some car makers began independent "people's
car" projects&nbsp;– the [[Mercedes-Benz 130|Mercedes 170H]], [[Adler 2.5-litre|Adler
AutoBahn]], [[Steyr 50|Steyr 55]], and [[Hanomag]] 1.3L, among others.

The trend was not new, as [[Béla Barényi]] is credited with having conceived the
basic design in the mid-1920s. [[Josef Ganz]] developed the Standard Superior (going
as far as advertising it as the "German Volkswagen"). In Germany, the company
[[Hanomag]] mass-produced the [[Hanomag 2/10 PS|2/10 PS]] "Komissbrot", a small,
cheap rear engined car, from 1925 to 1928.<ref>{{cite web|last=Miller |first=Elan
|url=http://www.jpost.com/JewishWorld/JewishFeatures/Article.aspx?id=154651|title=Was
Hitler's Beetle designed by a Jew?|newspaper=Jerusalem
Post|date=2009-09-13|accessdate=2013-02-18}}</ref> Also, in Czechoslovakia, the
[[Hans Ledwinka]]'s penned [[Tatra T77]], a very popular car amongst the German
elite, was becoming smaller and more affordable at each revision. [[Ferdinand
Porsche]], a well-known designer for high-end vehicles and race cars, had been trying
for years to get a manufacturer interested in a small car suitable for a family.  He
felt the small cars at the time were just stripped down big cars.  Instead he built a
car he called the "Volksauto" from the ground up in 1933, using many of the ideas
floating around at the time and several of his own, putting together a car with an
air-cooled rear engine, torsion bar suspension, and a "beetle" shape, the front hood
rounded for better [[aerodynamic]]s (necessary as it had a small engine).<ref
name=SmallWonder>{{cite book|last=Nelson|first=Walter|title=Small
Wonder|year=1967|publisher=Little, Brown & Company|page=333}}</ref>

[[File:VW logo during the 1930s.svg|thumb|left|130px|VW logo during the 1930s,
initials surrounded by a stylized cogwheel and swastika wings<ref name=Spiegel/>]]
In 1934, with many of the above projects still in development or early stages of
production, [[Adolf Hitler]] became involved, ordering the production of a basic
vehicle capable of transporting two adults and three children at
{{convert|100|km/h|mph|0|abbr=on}}. He wanted all German citizens to have access to
cars.<ref name=SmallWonder /> The "People's Car" would be available to citizens of
the [[Third Reich]] through a savings plan at 990 [[German reichsmark|Reichsmark]]
($396 in 1930s U.S. dollars)—about the price of a small motorcycle (the average
income being around 32 RM a week).<ref name="RiseFall">William Shirer, ''The Rise and
Fall of the Third Reich'' (Touchstone Edition) (New York: Simon & Schuster,
1990)</ref><ref name="LastBeet">{{cite
web|url=http://www.lasteditionbeetle.com/history.php|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20080306113930/http://www.lasteditionbeetle.com/history.php|title=Last
Edition Beetle: History|archivedate=6 March
2008|website=Lasteditionbeetle.com|accessdate=22 September 2015}}</ref>

Despite heavy lobbying in favor of one of the existing projects, it soon became
apparent that private industry could not turn out a car for only 990 RM.  Thus,
Hitler chose to sponsor an all-new, state-owned factory using Ferdinand Porsche's
design (with some of Hitler's design constraints, including an air-cooled engine so
nothing could freeze). The intention was that ordinary Germans would buy the car by
means of a savings scheme (''"{{lang|de|Fünf Mark die Woche musst du sparen, willst
du im eigenen Wagen fahren}}"&nbsp;– "Five marks a week you must put aside, if you
want to drive your own car''"), which around 336,000 people eventually paid
into<ref>König, Wolfgang. “Adolf Hitler vs. Henry Ford: The Volkswagen, the Role of
America as a Model, and the Failure of a Nazi Consumer Society.” German Studies
Review, vol. 27, no. 2, 2004, pp. 249–268. JSTOR, JSTOR,
www.jstor.org/stable/1433081.</ref>. However, the entire project was financially
unsound, and only the Nazi party made it possible to provide funding.<ref>* {{Cite
book| authorlink = Adam Tooze| first = Adam| last = Tooze| title = [[The Wages of
Destruction]]: The Making and Breaking of the Nazi Economy| location = London|
publisher = Allen Lane| year = 2006| isbn = 978-0-7139-9566-4| ref = harv|
page=154}}</ref><ref group="Note">Tooze notes: "Even if the war had not intervened,
developments up to 1939 made clear that the entire conception of the 'people's car'
was a disastrous flop." ''Tooze (2006) p.156)''.</ref>

Prototypes of the car called the "KdF-Wagen" (German: ''[[Strength Through Joy|Kraft
durch Freude]]''&nbsp;– "Strength through Joy"), appeared from 1938 onwards (the
first cars had been produced in [[Stuttgart]]). The car already had its distinctive
round shape and [[Air-cooled engine|air-cooled]], [[Flat-4|flat-four]], [[Rear-engine
design|rear-mounted engine]]. The VW car was just one of many [[Strength Through
Joy|KdF]] programs, which included things such as tours and outings. The prefix
''Volks—'' ("People's") was not just applied to cars, but also to other products in
Germany; the "[[Volksempfänger]]" radio receiver for instance. On May 28, 1937,
''Gesellschaft zur Vorbereitung des Deutschen Volkswagens mbH'' ("Company for the
Preparation of the German Volkswagen Ltd."), or ''Gezuvor''<ref
name="porsche-75">{{cite web|
url=https://press.pl.porsche.com/download/prod/presse_pag/PressBasicData.nsf/Download?OpenAgent&attachmentid=166917|
archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20160923153859/https://press.pl.porsche.com/download/prod/presse_pag/PressBasicData.nsf/Download?OpenAgent&attachmentid=166917|
dead-url=yes| archive-date=23 September 2016| title=Seventy-Five Years Ago: Porsche
Receives the Order to Construct the Volkswagen| date=16 June 2009|
website=porsche.com| publisher=[[Porsche AG]]|accessdate=22 January 2010}}</ref> for
short, was established by the [[Deutsche Arbeitsfront]] in [[Berlin]]. More than a
year later, on September 16, 1938, it was renamed to ''Volkswagenwerk [[GmbH]]''.<ref
name="Odin, L.C. 2015">Odin, L.C. ''World in Motion 1939 - The whole of the year's
automobile production''. Belvedere Publishing, 2015. ASIN:
B00ZLN91ZG.</ref><ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.hillsideimports.com/vw-history/brief-history-volkswagen|title=A
Brief History Of Volkswagen|website=hillsideimports.com|accessdate=10 March
2015}}</ref>

[[File:VW Typ 83 vr.jpg|thumb|VW Type 82E]]

[[Erwin Komenda]], the longstanding [[Auto Union]] chief designer, part of Ferdinand
Porsche's hand-picked team,<ref name=SmallWonder /> developed the car body of the
prototype, which was recognizably the [[Volkswagen Beetle|Beetle]] known today. It
was one of the first cars designed with the aid of a [[wind tunnel]]—a method used
for German aircraft design since the early 1920s. The car designs were put through
rigorous tests, and achieved a record-breaking million miles of testing before being
deemed finished.

The construction of the new factory started in May 1938 in the new town of "Stadt des
KdF-Wagens" (modern-day [[Wolfsburg]]), which had been purpose-built for the factory
workers.<ref name="Odin, L.C. 2015"/> This factory had only produced a handful of
cars by the time war started in 1939. None were actually delivered to any holder of
the completed saving stamp books, though one Type 1 Cabriolet was presented to Hitler
on 20 April 1944 (his 55th birthday).<ref name="Odin, L.C. 2015"/>

War changed production to military vehicles—the Type 82 ''[[Volkswagen
Kübelwagen|Kübelwagen]]'' ("Bucket car") utility vehicle (VW's most common wartime
model), and the [[amphibious vehicle|amphibious]] ''[[Volkswagen
Schwimmwagen|Schwimmwagen]]''—manufactured for German forces.<!-- There is an
unreasonably large gap in the history here from April 1938 until April 1945. With the
amount of detail given both before April 1938 and after April 1945, this omission
should at least be noted, if not fully fleshed out. --> As was common with much of
the production in [[Nazi Germany]] during the war, [[slave]] labor was utilized in
the Volkswagen plant, e.g. from [[Arbeitsdorf]] concentration camp. The company would
admit in 1998 that it used 15,000 slaves during the war effort. German historians
estimated that 80% of Volkswagen's wartime workforce was slave labor.{{citation
needed|date=May 2011}} Many of the slaves were reported to have been supplied from
the concentration camps upon request from plant managers. A lawsuit was filed in 1998
by survivors for restitution for the forced labor.<ref>{{cite news|title=Volkswagen
Faces Suit Over Jewish Slave
Labor|url=https://www.nytimes.com/1998/06/13/world/world-news-briefs-volkswagen-faces-suit-over-jewish-slave-labor.html|accessdate=18
May 2011|newspaper=The New York Times|date=13 June 1998}}</ref>  Volkswagen would set
up a voluntary restitution fund.<ref>{{cite news|title=World: Americas German firms
face slave labour
case|url=http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/162126.stm|accessdate=18 May
2011|newspaper=BBC News |date=1 September 1998}}</ref>

[[File:VW Wolfsburg.JPG|thumb|Volkswagen factory]]

===1945–1948: British Army intervention, unclear future===
The company owes its [[post-war]] existence largely to one man, War-time [[British
Army]] [[officer (armed forces)|officer]] Major [[Ivan Hirst]], [[Royal Electrical
and Mechanical Engineers|REME]]. In April 1945, KdF-Stadt and its heavily bombed
factory were captured by the Americans, and subsequently handed over to the British,
within whose [[Allied Occupation Zones in Germany|occupation zone]] the town and
factory fell. The factories were placed under the control of [[Saddleworth]]-born
Hirst, by then a civilian Military Governor with the occupying forces. At first, one
plan was to use it for [[List of military vehicles|military vehicle]] maintenance,
and possibly dismantle and ship it to Britain. Since it had been used for military
production, (though not of KdF-Wagens) and had been in Hirst's words, a "political
animal" rather than a commercial enterprise{{cn|date=July 2017}} — technically making
it liable for destruction under the terms of the [[Potsdam Agreement]] — the
equipment could have been salvaged as [[war reparations]].{{cn|date=July 2017}}
Allied dismantling policy changed in late 1946 to mid-1947, though heavy industry
continued to be dismantled until 1951.{{cn|date=July 2017}}

One of the factory's War-time 'KdF-Wagen' cars had been taken to the factory for
repairs and abandoned there. Hirst had it repainted green and demonstrated it to
British Army headquarters. Short of light transport, in September 1945 the British
Army was persuaded to place a vital order for 20,000 cars. However, production
facilities had been massively disrupted, there was a refugee crisis at and around the
factory and some parts (such as carburetors) were unavailable. With striking humanity
and great engineering and management ingenuity, Hirst and his German assistant
[[Heinrich Nordhoff]] (who went on to run the Wolfsburg facility after Military
Government ended in 1949) helped to stabilize the acute social situation while
simultaneously re-establishing production. Hirst, for example, used his fine
engineering experience to arrange the manufacture of carburetors, the original
producers being effectively 'lost' in the Russian zone.<ref>{{cite
journal|last1=Porter|first1=Lindsay|title=Mr|journal=Thoroughbred & Classic
Cars|date=October 1986}}</ref> The first few hundred cars went to personnel from the
occupying forces, and to the German Post Office. Some British [[Soldier|Service
personnel]] were allowed to take their [[Volkswagen Beetle|Beetles]] back to the
United Kingdom when they were [[Demobilization|demobilised]].<ref
name=uk-import-first>{{cite web
|url=http://www.hillsideimports.com/vw-history/the-first-demonstrator-of-the-volkswagen-beetle
|title=Volkswagen Model 11 Beetle | website=hillsideimports.com | date=20 February
2014 | accessdate=4 April 2015}}</ref>{{better source|date=July 2017}}

In 1986, Hirst explained how it was commonly misunderstood that he had run Wolfsburg
as a British Army Major. The defeated German staff, he said, were initially sullen
and unresponsive, having been conditioned by many years of Nazism and they were
sometimes unresponsive to orders. At Nordhoff's suggestion, he sent back to England
for his officer's uniform and from then on, had no difficulty in having his
instructions followed. Hirst can be seen photographed at Wolfsburg in his uniform,
although he was not actually a soldier at the time but a civilian member of the
Military Government. The title of 'Major' was sometimes used by someone who had left
the Army as a courtesy title. In fact, Hirst chose not to do so.{{cn|date=July 2017}}

The post-war [[Industrial plans for Germany]] set out rules that governed which
industries Germany was allowed to retain. These rules set German car production at a
maximum of 10% of 1936 car production.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.trumanlibrary.org/whistlestop/study_collections/marshall/large/documents/index.php?pagenumber=10&documentid=22&documentdate=1947-03-24&studycollectionid=mp&nav=OK
|title=Harry S. Truman – Library & Museum&nbsp;– Draft, The President's Economic
Mission to Germany and Austria, Report 3, March, 1947; OF 950B: Economic Mission as
to Food...; Truman Papers |publisher=Trumanlibrary.org |accessdate=27 September
2010}}</ref> By 1946, the factory produced 1,000 cars a month—a remarkable feat
considering it was still in disrepair. Owing to roof and window damage, production
had to stop when it rained, and the company had to barter new vehicles for steel for
production.{{cn|date=July 2017}}

The car and its town changed their Second World War-era names to "Volkswagen" and
"[[Wolfsburg]]" respectively, and production increased. It was still unclear what was
to become of the factory. It was offered to representatives from the American,
Australian, British, and French motor industries. Famously, all rejected it. After an
inspection of the plant, [[William Edward Rootes, 1st Baron Rootes|Sir William
Rootes]], head of the British [[Rootes Group]], told Hirst the project would fail
within two years, and that the car "...is quite unattractive to the average motorcar
buyer, is too ugly and too noisy ... If you think you're going to build cars in this
place, you're a bloody fool, young man." {{Citation needed|date=October 2009}} The
official report said "To build the car commercially would be a completely uneconomic
enterprise."<ref>Anders Ditlev Clausager (18 March 2000).
[https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/mar/18/guardianobituaries Obituaries – Ivan
Hirst] [[The Guardian]](UK).</ref>  In an ironic twist of fate, Volkswagen
manufactured a locally built version of Rootes's [[Hillman Avenger]] in Argentina in
the 1980s, long after Rootes had gone bankrupt at the hands of [[Chrysler
Corporation|Chrysler]] in 1978—the Beetle outliving the Avenger by over 30 years.

Ford representatives were equally critical. In March 1948, the British offered the
Volkswagen company to Ford, free of charge. [[Henry Ford II]], the son of [[Edsel
Ford]], traveled to West Germany for discussions. Heinz Nordhoff was also present,
and Ernest Breech, chairman of the board for Ford Motor Company. Henry Ford II looked
to Ernest Breech for his opinion, and Breech said, "Mr. Ford, I don't think what
we're being offered here is worth a dime!"<ref name=SmallWonder /> Ford passed on the
offer, leaving Volkswagen to rebuild itself under Nordhoff's
leadership.{{cn|date=July 2017}}

===1948–1961: Icon of post war West German regeneration===
[[File:1949 VW Beetle.jpg|right|thumb|1949 Volkswagen "split rear window" [[Sedan
(car)|Sedan]]]]
[[File:Volkswagen Typ 1 Cabriolet 1953.jpg|thumb|right|Volkswagen Cabriolet (1953)]]
[[File:2010-05-04-VW-T1-1.JPG|right|thumb|[[Volkswagen Type 2]] (T1)]]
[[File:glj01.jpg|thumb|right|An original 1300 Deluxe, circa 1966.]]
[[File:Volkswagen Beetle successor proposal (1967) which never got past the prototype
stage.JPG|thumb|right|In the later 1960s, as worldwide appetite for the Beetle
finally began to diminish, a variety of successor designs were proposed and, in most
cases, rejected by management.]]

From 1948, Volkswagen became an important element, symbolically and economically, of
West German regeneration.{{according to whom|date=July 2017}} [[Heinrich Nordhoff]]
(1899–1968), a former senior manager at [[Opel]] who had overseen civilian and
military vehicle production in the 1930s and 1940s, was recruited to run the factory
in 1948. In 1949, Major Hirst left the company—now re-formed as a trust controlled by
the West German government and government of the State of [[Lower Saxony]]. The
"Beetle" sedan or "peoples' car" Volkswagen is the Type 1. Apart from the
introduction of the [[Volkswagen Type 2]] [[commercial vehicle]] (van, pick-up and
camper), and the [[Volkswagen Karmann Ghia|VW Karmann Ghia]] sports car, Nordhoff
pursued the one-model policy until shortly before his death in 1968.

Volkswagens were first exhibited and sold in the United States in 1949, but sold only
two units in America that first year. On entry to the U.S. market, the VW was briefly
sold as a ''Victory Wagon''. [[Volkswagen Group of America|Volkswagen of America]]
was formed in April 1955 to standardise sales and service in the United States.
Production of the Type 1 Volkswagen Beetle increased dramatically over the years, the
total reaching one million in 1955.

The UK's first official Volkswagen Importer, Colborne Garages of [[Ripley, Surrey]],
started with parts for the models brought home by soldiers returning from
Germany.<ref name=uk-import-first/>

Canadian Motors, Limited brought in Canada's first shipment of Volkswagens on 10 July
1952 (shipping order 143075){{citation needed|date=October 2016}}. The order
consisted of 12 vehicles, (3) model 11C, a black, green, and sandcolor (3) 11GS, a
chestnut brown and two azure blue, (2) 24A-M51 in red, (1)21A in blue, (1) 23A in
blue, (1) 22A beige color, and one ambulance{{citation needed|date=October 2016}}.
Volkswagens were seen in Canada for the first time at the Canadian National
Exhibition in August 1952 and were accepted enthusiastically. (At least one Type 2
bus from this order still exists, and is currently in France undergoing
restoration){{citation needed|date=October 2016}}. The first shipment for Volkswagen
Canada reached Toronto in early December 1952. (At least one Type 1 from this first
shipment still exists, and was driven on a nationwide tour for Volkswagen Canada's
60th year of business festivities in 2012){{citation needed|date=October 2016}}. 

By 1955, sales were on a basis that warranted the building of the Volkswagen plant on
a {{convert|32|acre|m2|adj=on}} site on Scarboro's Golden Mile. To this, a
{{convert|60000|sqft|m2|adj=on}} building with administration, showrooms, service,
repairs and parts was built in 1957, with storage for $4,000,000 of parts{{citation
needed|date=October 2016}}.
 
In 1959, VW started production at a plant near São Paulo in Brazil.
<ref>[http://www.ardmediathek.de/tv/Reportage-Dokumentation/Komplizen-VW-und-die-brasilianische-M/Das-Erste/Video?bcastId=799280&documentId=44669802
Komplizen? - VW und die brasilianische Militärdiktatur.] DasErste, ARD,
24.07.2017</ref> Volkswagen do Brasil was accused of spying on workers during the
time of the military dictatorship in the 1970´s and informing police on oppositional
activities. In 1976, mass arrests occurred and some VW employees were tortured. In
1979, Brazilian VW workers traveled to Wolfsburg to inform the CEO in person. In
2015, activists and former VW employees in Brazil spoke out in public accused the
company´s silence about persecution of its workers. In fall 2016, VW commissioned an
expet review of the situation due end of
2017.<ref>[http://www.dw.com/en/vw-worked-hand-in-hand-with-brazils-military-dictatorship/a-39814070
VW worked hand in hand with Brazil's military dictatorship] 24.07.2017 Deutsche
Welle</ref>

On August 22, 1960, ''Volkswagenwerk GmbH'' was renamed to ''Volkswagenwerk AG''.

Sales soared, throughout the 1960s, peaking at the end of the decade, thanks in part
to the famous advertising campaigns by New York advertising agency [[DDB
Worldwide|Doyle, Dane Bernbach]].{{cn|date=July 2017}} Led by art director Helmut
Krone, and copywriters [[Julian Koenig]] and Bob Levinson, Volkswagen advertisements
became{{when|date=July 2017}} as popular as the car, using crisp layouts and witty
copy to lure the younger, sophisticated consumers with whom the car became
associated.{{cn|date=July 2017}} Even though it was almost universally known as the
Beetle (or the Bug), it was never officially labelled as such by the manufacturer,
instead referred to as the Type 1.{{cn|date=July 2017}}

Although the car was becoming outdated, during the 1960s and early 1970s, American
exports, innovative advertising, and a growing reputation for reliability helped
production figures surpass the levels of the previous record holder, the [[Ford Model
T]]. On 17 February 1972 the 15,007,034th Beetle was sold. Volkswagen could now claim
the world production record for the most-produced, single make of car in history. By
1973, total production was over 16 million.

To commemorate its passing the Ford Model T's record sales mark and its victories in
the Baja 1000 Mexican races from 1967 to 1971, Volkswagen produced its first
limited-edition Beetle. It was marketed as the "Baja Champion SE"<ref>Colin Shinkin
[http://www.sebeetles.com/champion.htm About the 1972 Baja Champion SE – USA]
{{webarchive|url=https://web.archive.org/web/20150428232126/http://www.sebeetles.com/champion.htm
|date=28 April 2015 }} (photos). SEBeetles.com.</ref> in the United States and the
"Marathon" Superbeetle in the rest of the world. It featured unique "Marathon Blau"
metallic blue paint, steel-pressed 10-spoke 15-inch (38&nbsp;cm) magnesium-alloy
wheels, a commemorative metal plate mounted on the glovebox and a certificate of
authenticity presented to the original purchaser. Dealer-installed options for this
limited-edition Superbeetle included the following: white stripes running the length
of the rocker-panel, a special shifter knob, bumper overriders, tapered exhaust tips,
fake walnut inserts in the dashboard (behind the steering wheel and the glovebox
cover) as well as [[Robert Bosch GmbH|Bosch]] fog lights mounted on the front
bumper.{{cn|date=July 2017}}

===1961–1973: Beetle to Golf===
[[File:Volkswagen Type 3.jpg|thumb|left|A 1963 [[Volkswagen Type 3|VW Type 3
Notchback]] ]]

The 1961 Type 1 Beetle had a 36hp 1200cc four cylinder air-cooled flat-four opposed
OHV engine made of aluminum alloy block and heads. By 1966, the Type 1 came with a
1300 engine. By 1967 the Type 1 had a 1500 engine, and 1600 in 1970. The air-cooled
engine lost favor in the USA market with the advent of non-leaded gasoline and smog
controls. These air-cooled engines were commonly tuned to be fuel rich in order to
control engine over-heating, and this led to excessive carbon monoxide emissions. VW
Production equipment was eventually moved to Mexico where vehicle emissions were not
regulated. Beetles were popular on the USA West Coast where the limited-capacity
cabin heating was less inconvenient. Beetles were popularized on the USA West Coast
as beach buggies and dune buggies. 

VW expanded its product line in 1961 with the introduction of four [[Volkswagen Type
3|Type 3]] models (Karmann Ghia, Notchback, Fastback, and Variant) based on the new
Type 3 mechanical underpinnings. The name 'Squareback' was used in the U.S.A for the
Variant.

In 1969 the larger [[Volkswagen Type 4|Type 4]] (411 and 412) models were introduced.
These differed substantially from previous vehicles, with the notable introduction of
[[monocoque|monocoque/unibody]] construction, the option of a fully [[automatic
transmission]], electronic [[fuel injection]], and a sturdier powerplant.

Volkswagen added a "Super Beetle"<ref>{{cite web|last=Dean |first=Wayne |date=28
October 2006 |url= http://www.superbeetles.com/history.htm |title=History of the
Super Beetle |publisher=superbeetles.com |accessdate=6 May 2015}}</ref> (the Type
131) to its lineup in 1971. The Type 131 differed from the standard Beetle in its use
of a [[MacPherson strut]] front [[suspension (vehicle)|suspension]] instead of the
usual [[torsion beam suspension|torsion bars]]. The Super Beetle featured a new
hooded, padded dash and curved windshield (from 1973 model year on up). Rack and
pinion steering replaced recirculating ball steering gears in model year 1975 and up.
The front of the car was stretched {{convert|2|in|mm}} to allow the spare tire to lie
flat, and the combination of these two features increased the usable front luggage
space.

In 1973, Volkswagen introduced the military-themed [[Volkswagen 181|Type 181]], or
"Trekker" in Europe, "Thing" in America, recalling the wartime Type 82. The military
version was produced for the [[NATO]]-era [[German Army]] during the [[Cold War]]
years of 1970 to 1979. The U.S. Thing version only sold for two years, 1973 and 1974.

[[File:Bundesarchiv B 145 Bild-F038791-0007, Wolfsburg, VW
Autowerk.jpg|thumb|left|[[Volkswagen Type 4]] [[assembly line]] in [[Wolfsburg]] as
of 1973]]
[[File:1969 Volkswagen 1600 Type 3 Squareback (17081445566).jpg|thumb|right|1969 VW
Squareback (Type III)]]

In 1964, Volkswagen acquired [[Auto Union]], and in 1969, [[NSU Motorenwerke AG]]
(NSU). The former company owned the historic [[Audi]] brand, which had disappeared
after the Second World War. VW ultimately merged Auto Union and NSU to create the
modern Audi company, and would go on to develop it as its [[luxury vehicle]]
[[marque]]. The purchase of Auto Union and NSU was a pivotal point in Volkswagen's
history, as both companies yielded the technological expertise that proved necessary
for VW to survive when demand for its air-cooled models went into decline.

By late 1972, Volkswagen had decided to cancel the nearly finished [[:File:Volkswagen
EA266 prototype Beetle replacement.JPG|typ 266]], a project for a mid-engined car to
replace the Beetle, and to focus on front-wheel-drive, water-cooled cars. [[Rudolf
Leiding]], recently made head of Volkswagen, cited noise, heat, and servicing
problems with the mid-engine layout, as well as the difficulty of making it a station
wagon.<ref name=zaCAR1172>{{cite magazine | magazine = CAR (South Africa) | title =
Volkswagenwerk plans new cars and engines | last = Wilkins | first = Gordon | volume
= 16 | number = 11 | date = December 1972 | ref = DNLCV | page = 11 | publisher =
Ramsay, Son & Parker (Pty) Ltd. | location = Cape Town, South Africa }}</ref>

[[File:Vw passat b1 v sst.jpg|thumb|right|[[Volkswagen Passat]] (1973–1977 model)]]

Volkswagen was in serious trouble by 1973.<ref>William Beaver (Nov–Dec 1992).
[https://archive.is/20120709024025/http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1038/is_n6_v35/ai_13246858
Volkswagen's American assembly plant: Fahrvergnugen was not enough – international
marketing] ''findarticles.com''; Business Horizons.</ref> The Type 3 and Type 4
models had sold in much smaller numbers than the Beetle and the [[NSU Motorenwerke
AG|NSU]]-based K70 also failed to woo buyers. Beetle sales had started to decline
rapidly in European and North American markets. The company knew that Beetle
production had to end, but faced a conundrum of how to replace it. VW's ownership of
Audi/[[Auto Union]] proved beneficial. Its expertise in [[front-wheel drive]], and
[[water cooling|water-cooled]] engines would help Volkswagen produce a credible
Beetle successor. Audi influences paved the way for this new generation of
Volkswagens: the Passat, Scirocco, Golf, and Polo.

First in the series was the [[Volkswagen Passat]] (Dasher in the US), introduced in
1973, a [[fastback]] version of the [[Audi 80]], using many identical body and
mechanical parts. Estate/wagon versions were available in many markets. In Europe,
the estate/wagon version dominated in market share for many years.

In spring 1974, the [[Volkswagen Scirocco|Scirocco]] followed. The coupe was designed
by [[Giorgetto Giugiaro]]. Based on the platform of the not yet released [[Volkswagen
Golf|Golf]], it was built at [[Karmann]] due to capacity constraints at Volkswagen.

The pivotal model emerged as the Volkswagen Golf in 1974, marketed in the United
States and Canada as the Rabbit for the 1st generation (1975–1985) and 5th generation
(2006–2009). Its angular styling was designed by the Italian [[Giorgetto Giugiaro]]).
Its design followed trends for small family cars set by the 1959 [[Mini]]&nbsp;– the
Golf had a [[transverse engine|transversely mounted]], water-cooled engine in the
front, driving the front wheels, and had a [[hatchback]], a format that has dominated
the market segment ever since. Beetle production at Wolfsburg ended upon the Golf's
introduction. It continued in smaller numbers at other German factories ([[Hanover]]
and [[Emden]]) until 1978, but mainstream production shifted to Brazil and Mexico.

In 1975, the [[Volkswagen Polo]] followed. It was a re-badged [[Audi 50]], which was
soon discontinued in 1978. The Polo became the base of the [[Volkswagen Derby]],
which was introduced 1977. The Derby was for all intents and purposes a [[Three-box
styling|three-box design]] of the Polo. After a second model generation, the Derby
was discontinued in 1985, although the bodystyle lived on in the form of the polo
classic/polo saloon until 1991.

Passat, Scirocco, Golf, and Polo shared many character defining features, as well as
parts and engines. They built the basis for Volkswagen's turn-around.

===1974–1990: Product line expansion===
[[File:VW Polo I front 20090810.jpg|thumb|[[Volkswagen Polo Mk1|Volkswagen Polo]]
(1975–1979 model)]]

While Volkswagen's range of cars soon became similar to that of other large European
automakers, the Golf has been the mainstay of the Volkswagen lineup since its
introduction,{{when|date=July 2017}} and the mechanical basis for several other cars
of the company. There have been seven generations of the [[Volkswagen Golf]], the
first of which was produced from the summer of 1974 until the autumn of 1983 (sold as
the Rabbit in the United States and Canada and as the Caribe in Latin America). Its
chassis also spawned the [[Volkswagen Scirocco]] sport [[coupe]], [[Volkswagen
Jetta]] saloon/sedan, Volkswagen Golf [[Cabriolet (automobile)|Cabriolet]]
convertible, and [[Volkswagen Caddy]] pick-up. North American production of the
Rabbit commenced at the [[Volkswagen Westmoreland Assembly Plant]] near [[New
Stanton, Pennsylvania]] in 1978. It would be produced in the United States as the
Rabbit until the spring of 1984. {{cn|date=July 2017}}The second-generation Golf
hatchback/Jetta sedan ran from October 1983 until the autumn of 1991, and a North
American version produced at Westmoreland Assembly went on sale at the start of the
1985 model year. The production numbers of the first-generation Golf has continued to
grow annually in South Africa as the [[Volkswagen Citi Golf|Citi Golf]], with only
minor modifications to the interior, engine and chassis, using tooling relocated from
the [[New Stanton, Pennsylvania]] plant when that site began to build the Second
Generation car.{{cn|date=July 2017}}

In the 1980s, Volkswagen's sales in the United States and Canada fell dramatically,
despite the success of models like the Golf elsewhere. The Japanese and the Americans
were able to compete with similar products at lower prices. Sales in the United
States were 293,595 in 1980, but by 1984 they were down to 177,709.<ref>Flammang,
James, ''Volkswagen: Beetles, Buses and Beyond,'' Krause Publications, 1996</ref>
The introduction of the second-generation Golf, GTI and Jetta models helped
Volkswagen briefly in North America. [[Motor Trend]] named the GTI its Car of the
Year for 1985, and Volkswagen rose in the J.D. Power buyer satisfaction ratings to
eighth place in 1985, up from 22nd a year earlier.<ref>Kiley, David, ''Getting the
Bugs Out: The Rise, Fall and Comeback of Volkswagen in America,'' John Wiley & Sons,
2001</ref>  VW's American sales broke 200,000 in 1985 and 1986 before resuming the
downward trend from earlier in the decade. Chairman [[Carl Hahn]] decided to expand
the company elsewhere (mostly in developing countries), and the New Stanton,
Pennsylvania factory closed on 14 July 1988.<ref>{{Cite
news|url=https://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9B0DE7D6113DF932A15752C1A961948260
|title= Volkswagen to Shut U.S. Plant | newspaper=[[New York Times]] | first=John |
last=Holusha | date=21 November 1987|accessdate=17 May 2008 }}</ref> Meanwhile, four
years after signing a cooperation agreement with the Spanish car maker SEAT in 1982,
Hahn expanded the company by purchasing a majority share of SEAT up to 75% by the end
of 1986, which VW bought outright in 1990.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://media.seat.com/en/company/368-seat-hoy.html |title= A look at SEAT's
time line 2008-1950 |publisher=SEAT S.A.| website=seat.com }}</ref> On July 4, 1985,
''Volkswagenwerk AG'' was renamed to ''Volkswagen AG''.

Volkswagen entered the supermini market in 1975 with the [[Volkswagen Polo]], a
stylish and spacious three-door hatchback designed by [[Gruppo Bertone|Bertone]]. It
was a strong seller in West Germany and most of the rest of Western Europe, being one
of the first foreign small cars to prove popular in Britain. It had started out in
1974 as the [[Audi 50]], which was only available in certain markets and was less
popular. The Polo entered a market sector already being dominated by the [[Fiat 127]]
and [[Renault 5]], and which before long would also include the [[Austin Metro]] and
[[Ford Fiesta]].{{cn|date=July 2017}}

In 1981, the second-generation Polo launched and sold as a hatchback and "coupe"
(with the hatchback resembling a small estate car and the coupe being similar to a
conventional hatchback), was an even greater success for Volkswagen.{{cn|date=July
2017}} Its practicality, despite the lack of a five-door version, helped ensure even
stronger sales than its predecessor, and it continued to sell well after a makeover
in 1990, finally being replaced by an all-new version in 1994.{{cn|date=July 2017}}
Also arriving in 1981 were the second generation of the larger Passat and a second
generation of the [[Volkswagen Scirocco]] coupe. The original Scirocco had been
launched in 1974 to compete with affordable four-seater coupes like the [[Ford
Capri]].{{cn|date=July 2017}}

In 1983 the MK2 Golf was launched. At the beginning of 1988, the third generation
Passat was the next major car launch and Volkswagen did not produce a hatchback
version of this Passat, despite the rising popularity of the hatchback bodystyle
throughout [[Europe]].{{cn|date=July 2017}} Just after launching the B3 Passat,
Volkswagen launched the [[Volkswagen Corrado|Corrado]], replacement for the Scirocco,
although the Scirocco remained in production until 1992.{{cn|date=July 2017}}

===1991–1999===
[[File:Volkswagen Golf IV 3-door.jpg|thumb|right|Volkswagen Golf, in North American
form]]

In 1991, Volkswagen launched the third-generation Golf, which was [[European Car of
the Year]] for 1992. The [[Volkswagen Golf Mk3|Golf Mk3]] and Jetta arrived in North
America in 1993. The sedan version of the Golf was badged Vento in Europe, but
remained [[Volkswagen Jetta|Jetta]] in the U.S. The [[Volkswagen Scirocco|Scirocco]]
and the later [[Volkswagen Corrado|Corrado]] were both Golf-based [[coupé]]s.

[[File:2002 Volkswagen New Beetle (9C MY02.5) 2.0 coupe (2010-10-01)
01.jpg|thumb|right|The [[Volkswagen New Beetle]]]]

In 1994, Volkswagen unveiled the [[J Mays]]-designed [[Volkswagen New Beetle#Concept
1|Concept One]], a "retro"-themed [[concept car]] with a resemblance to the original
Beetle, based on the platform of the Polo. Due to a positive response to the concept,
a production version was developed as the [[Volkswagen New Beetle|New Beetle]], based
on the Golf's larger platform.<ref name="ltvvwc-2003">{{cite web|title=The VW
Experimental Vehicles – the 1980s to present pt
2|url=http://www.ltv-vwc.org.uk/wheelspin/WS_feb_2003/WnW-prototypes04.htm|work=Wheelspin
|publisher=London & Thames Valley VW Club |accessdate=12 July 2010|date=February
2003}}</ref>

In 1995 the [[Volkswagen Sharan|Sharan]] was launched in Europe, the result of a
joint venture with [[Ford]], which also resulted in the [[Ford Galaxy]] and [[SEAT
Alhambra]].<ref>{{cite web|title=VW
Sharan|url=http://www.carmagazine.co.uk/Drives/Search-Results/First-drives/VW-Sharan-2011-CAR-review/|website=Car
Magazine|accessdate=4 January 2015|date=2 June 2011}}</ref>

The company's evolution of its model range was continued with the [[Volkswagen Golf
Mk4|Golf Mk4]], introduced at the end of 1997 (and in North America in 1999), its
chassis spawned a host of other cars within the Volkswagen Group; the [[Volkswagen
Jetta|Volkswagen Bora]] (the sedan called Jetta in the U.S.), SEAT Toledo, SEAT León,
[[Audi A3]], [[Audi TT]], and [[Škoda Octavia]]. Other main models during the decade
include the [[Volkswagen Polo|Polo]], a smaller car than the Golf, and the larger
[[Volkswagen Passat|Passat]] for the segment above the Golf.

In 1998 the company launched the new [[Volkswagen Lupo|Lupo]] city car. In 1999 they
announced the first "3-litre" car, a lightweight version of the Lupo that could
travel 100&nbsp;km with only 3-litres of diesel—making it the world's most fuel
efficient car at the time.<ref>{{cite web|title=VW launches its economic
miracle|url=http://www.theengineer.co.uk/news/vw-launches-its-economic-miracle/285981.article|website=The
Engineer|accessdate=4 January 2015|date=5 January 2000}}</ref>

===2000–present: Further expansion===
[[File:2011 Volkswagen Jetta (1KM MY10) 118TSI sedan (2015-07-03)
01.jpg|thumb|left|The fifth generation [[Volkswagen Jetta]]]]

Volkswagen began introducing an array of new models after [[Bernd Pischetsrieder]]
became [[Volkswagen Group]] CEO (responsible for all Group brands) in 2002. The
sixth-generation [[Volkswagen Golf Mk6|VW Golf]] was launched in 2008, came runner-up
to the [[Opel Insignia|Opel/Vauxhall Insignia]] in the 2009 [[European Car of the
Year]], and has spawned several cousins: [[VW Jetta]], [[VW Scirocco]], SEAT León,
SEAT Toledo, [[Škoda Octavia]] and Audi A3 hatchback ranges, as well as a new
mini-[[Multi-purpose vehicle|MPV]], the [[SEAT Altea]]. The GTI, a "[[hot hatch]]"
performance version of the Golf, boasts a 2.0&nbsp;L [[Turbocharger|Turbocharged]]
Fuel Stratified Injection (FSI) [[Gasoline direct injection|direct injection]]
engine. VW began marketing the Golf under the Rabbit name once again in the U.S. and
Canada in 2006.

The sixth-generation Passat and the fifth-generation Jetta both debuted in 2005, and
VW announced plans to expand its lineup further by bringing back the [[Volkswagen
Scirocco|Scirocco]] by 2008. Other models in [[Wolfgang Bernhard]]'s (Volkswagen
brand CEO) "product offensive" include the [[Volkswagen Tiguan|Tiguan]] mid-sized SUV
in 2008 and a [[Volkswagen Passat Coupé|Passat Coupé]]. In November 2006 Bernd
Pischetsrieder announced his resignation as Volkswagen Group CEO, and was replaced by
Audi worldwide CEO [[Martin Winterkorn]] at the beginning of 2007.

[[File:VW Scirocco III 1.4 TSI DSG Team Deep Black.JPG|thumb|right|The third
generation [[Volkswagen Scirocco]]]]

Volkswagen in 2005 maintained North American sales of 224,195. Momentum continued for
fiscal 2006, as VW's North American sales for the year were 235,140 vehicles, a 4.9
percent increase over 2005, despite a slump in domestic North American manufacturer's
sales. In conjunction with the introduction of new models, production location of
Volkswagen vehicles also underwent great change. The 2007 [[Volkswagen Eos|Eos]], a
hardtop convertible, is produced in a new facility in Portugal. All Golfs/Rabbits and
GTIs as of 2006 are manufactured in Wolfsburg, Germany, rather than VW's Mexican
factory in [[Puebla]], where Golfs and GTIs for the North American market were
produced from 1989 to 1998, and the Brazilian factory in [[Curitiba]], where Golfs
and GTIs were produced from 1999 to 2006 (the [[Volkswagen Jetta|Jetta]] has
primarily been made in Mexico since 1989). VW is also in the process of reconfiguring
an automotive assembly plant in Belgium. The new models and investments in
manufacturing improvements were noticed immediately by automotive critics. Favorable
reviews for VW's newest cars include the GTI being named by ''[[Consumer Reports]]''
as the top sporty car under $25,000, one of ''[[Car and Driver]]'' magazine's "[[Car
and Driver Ten Best|10 Best]]" for 2007, [[Automobile Magazine|''Automobile''
Magazine's]] 2007 Car of the Year, as well as a 2008 ''[[Motor Trend]]'' comparison
ranking the mid-size Passat first in its class.

[[File:VW Golf 7 Blue (11050391564) (cropped).jpg|thumb|left|The seventh generation
[[Volkswagen Golf]]]]

Volkswagen partnered with [[Daimler AG]] and other companies to market the
[[BlueTec]] [[clean diesel]] technology on cars and trucks from Mercedes-Benz,
Volkswagen, and other companies and brands. According to the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, four of the ten most fuel-efficient vehicles
available for sale in the U.S. are powered by Volkswagen diesel engines.<ref>{{cite
web
|url=http://www.fueleconomy.gov/feg/PowerSearch.do?action=noform&year1=2012&year2=2013&vfuel=Diesel&mclass=Small+Cars,%20Family+Sedans,%20Large+Sedans,%20Upscale+Sedans,%20Luxury+Sedans,%20Hatchbacks,%20Coupes,%20Convertibles,%20Sports/Sporty+Cars,%20Station+Wagons&srchtyp=newDslCars
|title=Fuel Economy of New Diesel Cars |year=2012 |website=Fueleconomy.gov
|publisher=United States Environmental Protection Agency |accessdate=5 December
2012}}</ref> Volkswagen has offered a number of its vehicles with a TDI
([[Turbocharged Direct Injection]]) engine, which lends class-leading fuel economy to
several models. They were a three-way tie for 8th (TDI Beetle, TDI Golf, TDI Jetta)
and ninth, the TDI Jetta Wagon. In addition, all Volkswagen TDI diesel engines
produced from 1996 to 2006 can be driven on 100% [[biodiesel]] fuel.{{citation
needed|date=December 2012}}  For the 2007 model year, however, strict U.S. government
emissions regulations have forced VW to drop most diesels from their U.S. engine
lineup, but a new lineup of diesel engines compatible to U.S. standards returned to
the American market starting with Model Year 2009. These post-2009 Clean Diesel
engines are limited to running on 5% (B5) biodiesel only to maintain Volkswagen's
warranty. Volkswagen long resisted adding a [[sport utility vehicle|SUV]] to its
lineup, but relented with the introduction of the [[Volkswagen Touareg|Touareg]],
made in partnership with Porsche, while they worked on the [[Porsche Cayenne]] and
later the [[Audi Q7]]. Though acclaimed as a fine handling vehicle, the Touareg has
been a modest seller at best, and it has been criticised by auto reviewers for its
absence of a third-row seat, the relatively poor fuel economy, and the high vehicle
mass. VW set plans to add a compact SUV with styling influences from the "Concept A"
concept vehicle introduced at the 2006 [[Geneva Auto Show]], and on 20 July 2006, VW
announced that the new vehicle, called the [[Volkswagen Tiguan|Tiguan]].

Since the discontinuance of the T4 in 2003 and decision not to bring the T5 to the US
market, Volkswagen, ironically, lacked a van in its North American lineup. To change
this, Volkswagen launched the [[Volkswagen Routan]], a [[badge
engineering|badge-engineered]] [[Dodge Caravan|Dodge Grand Caravan]] made for the
American and Canadian markets, in 2008.

In September 2006, Volkswagen began offering the [[Volkswagen Golf Mk4#Mk4 "City Golf
(Golf City in 2009)" in Canada, South America & Bora HS in China|City Golf]] and City
Jetta only for the Canadian market. Both models were originally the [[Volkswagen Golf
Mk4|Mk4 Golf]] and Jetta but were later replaced with the Brazilian versions of the
Golf Mk4 and [[Volkswagen Jetta#Ongoing production|Bora]]. Volkswagen's introduction
of such models is seen as a test of the market for a subcompact and, if successful,
may be the beginnings of a thriving subcompact market for Volkswagen.

[[File:2006-2010 Volkswagen Passat (3C) sedan (2011-07-17) 01.jpg|thumb|The
[[Volkswagen Passat]] (3C)]]

In May 2011, Volkswagen completed [[Volkswagen Chattanooga Assembly Plant|Chattanooga
Assembly]] in the US state of Tennessee. The facility has produced Volkswagen cars
and SUVs specifically designed for North American markets, beginning with the
[[Volkswagen Passat NMS|Passat B7]] in 2011. The company recently announced plans to
expand further by investing $900 million to add floor space to the
factory.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.autoblog.com/2015/04/07/volkswagen-expansion-tech-center-chattanooga/|title=Volkswagen
plans expansion, tech center in Chattanooga|author=Chris Bruce|date=7 April
2015|work=Autoblog|accessdate=22 September 2015}}</ref>

The [[Volkswagen 1-litre car|VW XL1]] began a limited production run in 2013. The XL1
is a lightweight and fuel efficient two-person vehicle (only 795&nbsp;kg).

The [[Volkswagen Atlas]] (a large [[crossover (automobile)|crossover]] [[sport
utility vehicle|SUV]]) begins production in late 2016, and aims to help end several
years of losses for Volkswagen in the US, the world's second-largest auto market.<ref
name=Boston>{{Cite
news|url=http://www.boston.com/business/articles/2008/07/16/vw_picks_tenn_for_its_1st_us_car_plant_since_88/
|title=VW picks Tenn. for its 1st US car plant since '88 |author=[[Bloomberg News]]
|newspaper=[[Boston Globe]] |date=16 July 2008}}</ref><ref>{{cite
web|url=http://m.timesfreepress.com/news/2014/jul/14/vw-announce-new-suv-today-chattanooga/|title=UPDATE:
VW announces Chattanooga-made SUV, and 2,000 new
jobs|work=timesfreepress.com|accessdate=22 September 2015}}</ref>

On September 14, 2016, Volkswagen announced its partnership with three Israeli
cybersecurity experts to create a new company, Cymotive, dedicated to automotive
security.<ref>By Charlie Osborne, ZDNet.
“[http://www.zdnet.com/article/volkswagen-launches-new-cybersecurity-firm-to-tackle-car-security/
Volkswagen launches new cybersecurity firm to tackle car security].” September 15,
2016. Retrieved September 15, 2016.</ref>

VW calls their shift towards electric vehicles "Transform 2025+". As part of the
strategy, VW aims to launch more than 30 electric vehicles until 2025, and is
anticipating yearly sales of 2 to 3 million electric VW cars by 2025, which would
make up 20 to 25 percent of their total yearly sales volume.<ref>{{cite news
|author=<!--Staff writer(s); no by-line.--> |title=VW strives to be leader in e-cars,
self-driving vehicles |work=Deutsche Welle |location=Wolfsburg |date=May 5, 2017
|access-date=2017-05-07}}</ref> In September 2017, CEO Matthias Mueller announced
plans to have electric version of all of VW's 300 automotive models by 2030. The
company vows to spend 20 billion euros by 2030 to roll out the cars and designated
another 50 billion euros to buy the batteries needed to power the vehicles.<ref
name="bloomberg-ev">{{cite news|last1=Rauwald|first1=Christoph|title=VW to Build
Electric Versions of All 300 Models by
2030|url=https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-09-11/vw-ceo-vows-to-offer-electric-version-of-all-300-models-by-2030|accessdate=11
October 2017|work=Bloomberg|date=September 11, 2017}}</ref>

==Operations==
{{recentism|date=July 2017}}
Volkswagen is the founding and namesake member of the [[Volkswagen Group]], a large
international corporation in charge of multiple car and truck brands, including Audi,
SEAT, Lamborghini, Bentley, Bugatti, Scania, MAN, and Škoda. Volkswagen Group's
global headquarters are located in Volkswagen's historic home of Wolfsburg,
Germany.{{cn|date=July 2017}}<ref>{{Cite
web|url=https://www.volkswagenag.com/en/group.html|title=Group|website=www.volkswagenag.com|access-date=2017-09-07}}</ref>

Volkswagen Group, as a unit, is currently{{when|date=July 2017}} Europe's largest
automaker.<ref name=wsj20120604>{{cite news|last=Rauwald|first=Christoph|title=VW
Bolsters Focus on China|newspaper=[[The Wall Street Journal]]|date=4 June
2012|page=B3}}</ref>  For a long time, Volkswagen has had a market share over 20
percent.<ref>{{cite web |
url=http://www.acea.be/images/uploads/files/20100615_PRPC-FINAL-1005.pdf | title=New
Car Registrations By Manufacturer(PDF) | publisher=ACEA | date=15 June 2010 |
accessdate=2 July 2010 | deadurl=yes |
archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20110808211605/http://www.acea.be/images/uploads/files/20100615_PRPC-FINAL-1005.pdf
| archivedate=8 August 2011 | df=dmy-all }}</ref>

In 2010, Volkswagen posted record sales of 6.29&nbsp;million vehicles, with its
global market share at 11.4%.<ref>{{cite web|
url=https://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=aogNDPaJIfbQ|
publisher=Bloomberg | title=Volkswagen Posts Record 2009 Sales, Targets Toyota |
date=12 December 2010 | accessdate=12 December 2010}}</ref>  In 2008, Volkswagen
became the third largest automaker in the world,<ref>{{cite web|
url=http://www.leftlanenews.com/vw-overtakes-ford-as-3rd-largest-automaker.html|
publisher=Left Lane News | title=VW OVERTAKES FORD AS 3RD-LARGEST AUTOMAKER |date=29
August 2008 | accessdate=12 December 2010}}</ref> and, as of 2012, Volkswagen is the
second largest manufacturer worldwide.<ref name=wsj20120604/> Volkswagen has aimed to
double its US market share from 2% to 4% in 2014,<ref>{{cite web|
url=http://www.freep.com/article/20100111/BUSINESS03/100111045/VW-aims-to-double-U.S.-market-share|
publisher=Freep | title=VW aims to double U.S. market share | date=12 December 2010 |
accessdate=12 December 2010}}</ref> and is aiming to become, sustainably, the world's
largest car maker by 2018.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.boersennews.de/nachrichten/top-news/volkswagen-will-autoimperium-ausbauen/1728
|title=Volkswagen will Autoimperium ausbauen (22397572) &#124; börsennews.de
|publisher=Boersennews.de |date=2009-09-15 |accessdate=2013-12-02}}</ref><ref>{{cite
web|url=https://translate.google.com/translate?u=http%3A//www.boersennews.de/nachrichten/top-news/volkswagen-will-autoimperium-ausbauen/1728&hl=en&langpair=auto|title=Google
Translate |publisher=Translate.google.com |date= |accessdate=2013-12-02}}</ref>
Volkswagen Group's core markets include Germany and China.<ref>{{cite web |
url=http://media.vw.com/press_releases/volkswagen-group-reports-6-7-percent-growth-in-worldwide-deliveries-in-july
| publisher=VW | title=Volkswagen Group reports 6.7 percent growth in worldwide
deliveries in July | date=12 December 2010 | accessdate=12 December 2010 |
deadurl=yes |
archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20110725175213/http://media.vw.com/press_releases/volkswagen-group-reports-6-7-percent-growth-in-worldwide-deliveries-in-july
| archivedate=25 July 2011 | df=dmy-all }}</ref>

===Worldwide presence===
[[List of Volkswagen Group factories|Volkswagen has factories]] in many parts of the
world, manufacturing or assembling vehicles for local markets. In addition to plants
in Germany, Volkswagen has manufacturing or assembly facilities in Mexico, the US,
Slovakia, China, India, Indonesia,<ref name="investvine">{{cite
web|url=http://investvine.com/volkswagen-to-open-new-plant-in-indonesia/|title=Volkswagen
to open new plant in Indonesia|first=Todd|last=Watson |work=Inside Investor |date=20
August 2013 |accessdate=20 August 2013}}</ref> Russia, Malaysia, Brazil, Argentina,
Portugal, Spain, Poland, the Czech Republic, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kenya and South
Africa. In 2011, Volkswagen was named in the top 25 largest companies in the world by
the [[Forbes]] Global 2000.<ref>{{Cite news|title=The World's Biggest Public
Companies|url=https://www.forbes.com/global2000/|magazine=[[Forbes.com]]|accessdate=6
June 2011}}</ref><ref>{{Cite
news|title=Volkswagen|url=https://www.forbes.com/companies/volkswagen-group/|magazine=Forbes|accessdate=6
June 2011}}</ref>

Volkswagen is setting up a new factory in [[West Java]], Indonesia, which started
construction in mid-2013,.<ref name=ref2013022805>{{Cite news| title = German car
makers push Indonesia| publisher = Investvine.com| date = 2013-02-28| url=
http://investvine.com/german-car-makers-push-indonesia-presence/| accessdate
=2013-04-03}}</ref> The investment into the new plant, which will produce large
transporters and multivans, is valued at $140 million.

As of May 2014, Volkswagen is planning to start assembling certain engines in India
to increase localisation from 70% to 90%.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/Business/India-Business/Volkswagen-plans-engine-assembly-in-India-to-increase-90-per-cent-localisation/articleshow/35389109.cms|title=Volkswagen
plans engine assembly in India; to increase 90 per cent localisation|work=The Times
of India|accessdate=22 September 2015}}</ref>

In January 2016, Volkswagen announced launching a new factory in Algeria during a
summit between [[Angela Merkel]] and Algerian Prime minister [[Abdelmalek
Sellal]].<ref>{{cite news |
url=http://www.jeuneafrique.com/293388/economie/automobile-bientot-une-usine-volkswagen-en-algerie/
| title=Automobile : bientôt une usine Volkswagen en Algérie ? | work=[[Jeune
Afrique]] | date=13 January 2016 | accessdate=23 January 2016 |
language=French}}</ref>

===Work–life balance===
Volkswagen agreed in December 2011 to implement a rule passed by the company's
[[works council]] aimed at improving [[work–life balance]] by restricting company
email functionality on the firm's [[BlackBerry]] smartphones from 6:30&nbsp;pm to
7:30&nbsp;am. The change was a response to employees' complaints about high stress
levels at work and the expectation that employees would immediately answer
after-hours email from home. About 1,150 of Volkswagen's more than 190,000 employees
are affected by the email restriction.<ref name="Volkswagen to Improve Work-Life
Balance">{{cite news|last=Rzhevskiy|first=Ilya|title=Volkswagen to Improve Work-Life
Balance|url=http://www.theepochtimes.com/n2/business/volkswagen-to-improve-work-life-balance-168056.html|accessdate=2
January 2012|newspaper=The Epoch Times}}</ref><ref>{{Citation |url=
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-12-23/volkswagen-employees-wary-of-burnout-win-reprieve-from-blackberry-messages.html
|publisher=[[Bloomberg L.P.]] |title= Volkswagen Employees Wary of Burnout Win
Reprieve From BlackBerry Messages |first= Cornelius |last= Rahn |date= 23 December
2011 }}</ref>

===Relationship with Porsche and the Volkswagen Law===
Volkswagen has always had a close relationship with [[Porsche]], the
[[Stuttgart|Zuffenhausen]]-based sports car manufacturer founded in 1931 by
[[Ferdinand Porsche]], the original Volkswagen designer and Volkswagen company
co-founder, hired by Adolf Hitler for the project. The first Porsche car, the
[[Porsche 64]] of 1938, used many components from the [[Volkswagen Beetle]]. The 1948
[[Porsche 356]] continued using many Volkswagen components, including a tuned engine,
[[gearbox]] and suspension.

The two companies continued their collaboration in 1969 to make the [[Porsche
914|VW-Porsche 914 and Porsche 914-6]]. (The 914-6 had a 6-cylinder Porsche engine,
and the standard 914 had a Volkswagen engine.) Volkswagen and Porsche would
collaborate again in 1976 on the [[Porsche 912|Porsche 912-E]] (USA only) and the
[[Porsche 924]], which used many [[Audi]] components and was built at Audi's
[[Neckarsulm]] facilities. The 924 was originally designated for AUDI. Most [[Porsche
944]] models were built there, although they used far fewer VW components.

The [[Porsche Cayenne]], introduced in 2002, shares its entire chassis with the
[[Volkswagen Touareg]] and [[Audi Q7]], and is built at the same Volkswagen factory
in [[Bratislava]] that the other SUV's are built.

In September 2005, Porsche announced it would increase its 5% stake in Volkswagen to
20% at a cost of €3&nbsp;billion, with the intention that the combined stakes of
Porsche and the government of Lower Saxony would ensure that any hostile takeover by
foreign investors would be impossible.<ref>{{cite
news|url=http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/4281864.stm |title=Porsche wants 20%
Volkswagen deal &#124; 26 September 2005 |publisher=BBC News  |date=26 September 2005
|accessdate=27 September 2010}}</ref>  Speculated suitors included
[[DaimlerChrysler]], [[BMW]], and [[Renault]]. In July 2006, Porsche increased their
ownership again to 25.1%.

On 4 March 2005, the European Commission brought an action against the Federal
Republic of Germany before the European Court of Justice, claiming that the
[[Volkswagen Law]], which prevents any shareholder in Volkswagen from executing more
than 20% of the total voting rights in the firm, was illegally restricting the flow
of capital in Europe.<ref name="Official Text of the action">{{cite
web|author=Commission of the European Communities|title=Action brought on 4 March
2005 by the Commission of the European Communities against the Federal Republic of
Germany|url=http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=Volkswagen&docid=59985&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=66367#ctx1|publisher=European
Court of Justice|accessdate=13 February 2012}}</ref> On 13 February 2007, [[Advocate
General]] [[Dámaso Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer]] submitted an opinion to the court in support
of the action.<ref>{{cite news|url=http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/6356787.stm
|title=Top EU court finds against VW law |publisher=BBC News  |date=13 February 2007
|accessdate=27 September 2010}}</ref> This again opened the possibility of a hostile
takeover of VW and so on 26 March of the same year Porsche took its holding of
Volkswagen shares to 30.9%. Porsche formally announced in a press statement that it
did not intend to take over Volkswagen, but intended the move to avoid a competitor's
taking a large stake and to stop hedge funds from dismantling VW.<ref>{{cite
news|url=http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/6494593.stm |title=Porsche triggers VW
takeover bid |publisher=BBC News  |date=26 March 2007 |accessdate=27 September
2010}}</ref> As expected, on 22 October 2007, the [[European Court of Justice]] ruled
in agreement with Ruiz-Jarabo and the law was struck down.<ref>{{cite
news|last=Landler |first=Mark
|url=https://www.nytimes.com/2007/10/23/business/worldbusiness/23cnd-volks.html
|title= Court Strikes Down "Volkswagen Law" |location=Germany |newspaper=[[New York
Times]] |date=23 October 2007 |accessdate=26 August 2011}}</ref><ref name="Full Text
of the Judgment">{{cite web|author=European Court of Justice|title=Judgment of the
Court (Grand Chamber) in Case
C-112/05|url=http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=Volkswagen&docid=70710&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=req&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=66367#ctx1|publisher=European
Court of Justice|accessdate=13 February 2012}}</ref> In October 2007, the [[European
Court of Justice]] ruled that the VW law was illegal<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://curia.europa.eu/jcms/upload/docs/application/pdf/2009-02/cp070074en.pdf|title=THE
VOLKSWAGEN LAW RESTRICTS THE FREE MOVEMENT OF CAPITAL|date=23 October
2007|publisher=COURT OF JUSTICE OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES|accessdate=17 February
2013}}</ref> because it was [[Protectionism|protectionist]]. At that time,
[[Porsche]] held 31% of VW shares&nbsp;— although a smaller proportion of voting
rights, due to the Volkswagen Law&nbsp;— and there had been speculation that Porsche
would be interested in taking over VW if the law did not stand in its way. The court
also prevented the government from appointing Volkswagen board members.<ref>{{cite
news|url=http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/7057815.stm|title='Volkswagen law' is
ruled illegal|date=23 October 2007|publisher=BBC|accessdate=17 February 2013}}</ref>
The German government then rewrote the Volkswagen law, only to be sued
again.<ref>{{cite
news|url=http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204630904577057730270544356.html|title=EU
To Sue Germany Again Over 'Volkswagen Law'|date=24 November 2011|work=Wall Street
Journal|accessdate=17 February 2013}}</ref><ref>{{cite
news|url=http://www.autoblog.com/2011/11/27/germany-in-court-again-over-vw-law-could-face-fines-of-nearly/|title=Germany
in court again over "VW Law," could face fines of nearly
$375,000/day|last=Ramsey|date=27 November 2011|work=Autoblog|accessdate=17 February
2013}}</ref><ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.theparliament.com/latest-news/article/newsarticle/germany-sued-for-second-time-over-volkswagen-law/#.USD9cKUvmE0|title=Germany
sued for second time over 'Volkswagen law'|date=25 November 2011|work=The
Parliament|accessdate=17 February 2013}}</ref> In October 2013, the EU Court of
Justice in Luxembourg ruled that the rewritten Volkswagen law "complied in full" with
EU rules.<ref>{{cite
news|url=https://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-10-22/germany-wins-eu-court-fight-over-vw-law-legality-escapes-fines.html/|title=Germany
Wins EU Court Battle Over VW Law, Escapes Fines |author=Bloomberg|date=22 October
2013 |accessdate=5 February 2014}}</ref>

On 26 October 2008, Porsche revealed its plan to assume control of VW. As of that
day, it held 42.6% of Volkswagen's ordinary shares and stock options on another
31.5%. Combined with the state of Lower Saxony's 20.1% stake, this left only 5.8% of
shares on the market—mostly with index funds that could not legally sell.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/05a4df12-a396-11dd-942c-000077b07658.html
|title=Financial Times &#124; Porsche plans to raise VW stake to 75%
|work=[[Financial Times]]  |date=26 October 2008 |accessdate=27 September
2010}}</ref> [[Hedge fund]]s desperate to cover their [[short (finance)|short]]
positions forced Volkswagen stock above one thousand euros per share, briefly making
it the world's largest company by [[market capitalisation]] on 28 October
2008.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/05bbd234-a4d2-11dd-b4f5-000077b07658.html?nclick_check=1
|title=VW vies for title of world's biggest company |work=Financial Times  |date=28
October 2008 |accessdate=27 September 2010}}</ref> By January 2009, Porsche had a
50.76% holding in Volkswagen AG, although the "Volkswagen Law" prevented it from
taking control of the company.<ref name="bbc-porsche-jan-2009">{{Cite
news|title=Porsche takes majority VW stake
|url=http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/7813073.stm|accessdate=16 June 2010|work=BBC
News |date=6 January 2009}}</ref>

On 6 May 2009, the two companies decided to join together, in a merger.

On 13 August, Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft's Supervisory Board signed the agreement
to create an integrated automotive group with Porsche led by Volkswagen. The initial
decision was for Volkswagen to take a 42.0% stake in Porsche AG by the end of 2009,
and it would also see the family shareholders selling the automobile trading business
of Porsche Holding Salzburg to Volkswagen.<ref>{{Cite
news|url=http://news.taume.com/World-Business/Business-Finance/Volkswagen-to-take-a-42-0-percent-stake-in-Porsche-AG-11861|title=Volkswagen
to take a 42.0 percent stake in Porsche AG|accessdate=22 January 2009|publisher=Taume
News|date=14 August
2009|deadurl=yes|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20090818162016/http://news.taume.com/World-Business/Business-Finance/Volkswagen-to-take-a-42-0-percent-stake-in-Porsche-AG-11861|archivedate=18
August 2009|df=dmy-all}}</ref>  In October 2009 however, Volkswagen announced that
its percentage in Porsche would be 49.9% for a cost of €3.9&nbsp;billion (the 42.0%
deal would have cost €3.3&nbsp;billion).<ref>{{Cite
news|url=http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/business/8317010.stm|title=VW to buy half of
Porsche by 2010|accessdate=20 October 2009 |publisher=BBC News |date=20 October
2009}}</ref> On 1 March 2011, Volkswagen has finalized the purchase of Porsche
Holding Salzburg (PHS), Austria's leading specialty automobile distributor, for
€3.3&nbsp;billion ($4.55&nbsp;billion).<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.industryweek.com/articles/vw_buys_porsche_sales_unit_24005.aspx?SectionID=4|title=VW
purchase Porsche Holding Salzburg (PHS)|accessdate=1 March 2011
|work=IndustryWeek|date=1 March 2011}}</ref>

===AutoMuseum===
Since 1985, Volkswagen has run the Volkswagen AutoMuseum in Wolfsburg, a museum
dedicated specifically to the history of Volkswagen.<ref>{{cite web
|url=http://automuseum.volkswagen.de/index.php?id=2&L=1 |title=:: Volkswagen
AutoMuseum :: About us |publisher=Automuseum.volkswagen.de |date= |accessdate=26
August 2011 |deadurl=yes
|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20110815195037/http://automuseum.volkswagen.de/index.php?id=2&L=1
|archivedate=15 August 2011 |df=dmy-all }}</ref> In addition to visiting exhibits in
person, owners of vintage Volkswagens anywhere in the world may order what the museum
refers to as a "Birth Certificate" for a set fee of €50—this formal "Zertifikat"
indicates basic information known at the time of manufacture (colors, options, port
of destination, etc.).<ref>{{cite web
|url=http://automuseum.volkswagen.de/urkunden.html?&L=1 |title=:: Volkswagen
AutoMuseum :: Certificate Generator |publisher=Automuseum.volkswagen.de |date=
|accessdate=26 August 2011 |deadurl=yes
|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20111011211316/http://automuseum.volkswagen.de/urkunden.html?&L=1
|archivedate=11 October 2011 |df=dmy-all }}</ref>

===Global sales figures, 2006-2016===
{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Year
! Global sales (in
millions)<ref>[https://www.statista.com/statistics/272049/worldwide-vehicle-sales-of-volkswagen-since-2006/
Volkswagen's worldwide vehicle sales from 2006 to 2016 (in millions)] Statista – the
statistics portal</ref>
|-
| 2006
| 5.7
|-
| 2007
| 6.2
|-
| 2008
| 6.3
|-
| 2009
| 6.3
|-
| 2010
| 7.3
|-
| 2011
| 8.4
|-
| 2012
| 9.3
|-
| 2013
| 9.7
|-
| 2014
| 10.2
|-
| 2015
| 10.0
|-
| 2016
| 10.3
|}

==Current models==
{| class="wikitable"
|-
| [[Volkswagen Up!|Up!]]
| [[File:2012 Volkswagen up! (AA MY13) 5-door hatchback (2015-11-11)
01.jpg|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|City car}}
|
* Hatchback
|-
| [[Volkswagen Gol|Gol]]
| [[File:Volkswagen Gol Mk6 Sedan.jpg|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|City car}}
|
* Hatchback
* Sedan
* coupé utility
|-
| [[Volkswagen Ameo|Ameo]]
| 
| {{nowrap|City car}}
|
* Sedan
|-
| [[Volkswagen Fox|Fox (South America)]]
| [[File:Volkswagen Fox 2015 in Punta del Este 01.JPG|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Supermini}}
|
* Hatchback
* Estate
|-
| [[Volkswagen Polo|Polo]]
| [[File:2014 Volkswagen Polo (6R MY15) 66TSI Trendline 5-door hatchback (2015-07-03)
01.jpg|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Supermini}}
|
* Hatchback
* Coupé
* Estate
|-
| [[Volkswagen Vento|Vento]]
| [[File:Vento 2015 Highline.png|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Subcompact car}}
|
* Sedan
|-
| [[Volkswagen Beetle (A5)|Beetle]]
| [[File:2012 Volkswagen Beetle -- NHTSA 2.jpg|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Small family car}}
|
* Hatchback
* Convertible 
|-
| [[Volkswagen Golf|Golf]]
| [[File:VW Golf Variant 1.4 TSI BlueMotion Technology Highline (VII, Facelift) –
Frontansicht, 21. April 2017, Düsseldorf.jpg|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Small family car}}
| 
* Hatchback
* Estate
* Convertible
|-
| [[Volkswagen Jetta|Jetta]]
| [[File:2015 Volkswagen Jetta (1B MY15) 118TSI Comfortline sedan (2015-08-07)
01.jpg|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Small family car}}
| 
* Sedan
|-
| [[Volkswagen Arteon|Arteon]]
| [[File:2017-03-07_Geneva_Motor_Show_0829.JPG|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Large family car}}
| 
* Sedan
|-
| [[Volkswagen Passat|Passat]]
| [[File:VW Passat B8 Limousine 2.0 TDI Highline.JPG|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Large family car}}
| 
* Sedan
* Estate
* Crossover ('''Alltrack''')
|-
| [[Volkswagen Scirocco|Scirocco]]
| [[File:VW Scirocco 1.4 TSI BlueMotion Technology Sport (III, Facelift) –
Frontansicht, 21. April 2017, Düsseldorf.jpg|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Compact sports car}}
|
* Coupe
|-
| [[Volkswagen Touran|Touran]]
| [[File:VW Touran II-2.jpg|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Compact MPV}}
|
* MPV
|-
| [[Volkswagen Sharan|Sharan]]
| [[File:VW Sharan II 2.0 TDI Reflexsilber.JPG|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Large MPV}}
|
* MPV
|-
|-
| [[Volkswagen T-Roc|T-Roc]]
| 
| {{nowrap|City crossover SUV}}
| 
* SUV
|-
| [[Volkswagen Tiguan|Tiguan]]
| [[File:VW Tiguan 2.0 TDI 4MOTION R-Line (II) – Frontansicht (1), 19. September
2015, Frankfurt.jpg|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Small crossover SUV}}
| 
* SUV
|-
| [[Volkswagen Atlas|Atlas]]
| [[File:Volkswagen Atlas 2017 SUV.jpg|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Large crossover SUV}}
| 
* SUV
|-
| [[Volkswagen Touareg|Touareg]]
| [[File:VW Touareg 3.0 TDI V6 SCR 4Motion Facelift.JPG|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| {{nowrap|Large crossover SUV}}
|
* SUV
|}

===GTI models===
{| class="wikitable"
|-
| [[Volkswagen Polo GTI#Mk5 Polo GTI|Polo GTI]]
| [[File:VW Polo GTI (V) – Frontansicht, 7. März 2011,
Mettmann.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| Supermini
|
* Hatchback
|-
| [[Volkswagen Golf|Golf GTI]]

| [[File:Volkswagen Golf GTi 2015 (16460156619).jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| Small family car
|
* Hatchback
|}

===Electric models===

====GTE models====
{{See also|Volkswagen XL1}}

GTE are [[plug-in hybrid electric vehicle]]s.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://formtrends.com/vw-head-of-design-on-the-cross-coupe-gte-concept/#.VbcaXfIyeVU|title=What
the Cross Coupe GTE Concept Means for Volkswagen « Form
Trends|website=Formtrends.com|accessdate=22 September 2015}}</ref> The GTE's engine,
electric motor, and transmission are fully shared with the [[Audi A3 Sportback
e-tron]]:<ref name="caranddriver.com">{{cite
web|url=http://www.caranddriver.com/reviews/2015-volkswagen-golf-gte-review|title=2015
Volkswagen Golf GTE|website=Caranddriver.com|accessdate=22 September 2015}}</ref>
{| class="wikitable"
|-
| [[Volkswagen Golf GTE|Golf GTE]]
| [[File:Black VW Golf GTE charging fl.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| Small family car
|
* [[Hatchback]]
| 1.4-liter and an electric motor;<br/>can travel for a full 50&nbsp;km on
electricity only.<ref name="caranddriver.com"/>
|-
| [[Volkswagen Passat GTE|Passat GTE]]
| [[File:Volkswagen Passat GTE Variant - Mondial de l'Automobile de Paris 2014 -
003.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| Large family car
|
* [[Station wagon|Estate]]
| 
|}

====e-models====
VW e-models are [[all-electric vehicle]]s.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://emobility.volkswagen.com/int/en/private/technology.html|title=Electric
mobility: the technology of electric cars -
Volkswagen|website=Emobility.volkswagen.com|accessdate=22 September 2015}}</ref>
{| class="wikitable"
|-
| [[Volkswagen e-Up!|e-up!]]
| [[File:VW e-up! at Hannover Messe.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|-
| [[Volkswagen e-Golf|e-Golf]]
| [[File:VW e-Golf LA Auto Show 2013.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|}

===R models===
R models are exotic and sport vehicles.
{| class="wikitable"
|-
| [[Volkswagen Golf Mk6#Golf R|Golf R]]
| [[File:VW Golf R (VII) – Frontansicht, 17. Juni 2014,
Düsseldorf.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| Small sports car
|
* Hatchback
|-
| [[VW Scirocco R|Scirocco R]]
| [[File:Volkswagen Scirocco R (15977639104).jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
| Small sports car
|
* Coupé
|}

==Historic models==
{| class="wikitable"
|-
|[[Volkswagen Kübelwagen|Kübelwagen]]
|[[File:VW Kuebelwagen 1.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1940–1945
|-
|[[Volkswagen Schwimmwagen|Schwimmwagen]]
|[[File:VW Schwimmwagen 1.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1942–1944
|-
|[[Volkswagen Type 1|Sedan, "Beetle, Bug"]]
|[[File:Glj01.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1938 - 2003
|-
|[[Volkswagen Karmann Ghia|Karmann Ghia]]
|[[File:MarignyMay07KarmannGhiaFrontSide.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1955–1974
|-
|[[Volkswagen Type 3|1500/1600]]
|[[File:VW Typ 3 front 20080227.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1961–1973
|-
|[[Volkswagen 181|181]]
|[[File:Vw 181 v sst.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1969–1983
|-
|[[Volkswagen Country Buggy|Country Buggy]]
|[[File:Volkswagen Country Buggy.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1967–1969
|-
|[[Volkswagen 411|411]]
|[[File:Volkswagen 411 Front view Essex.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1968–1972
|-
|[[Volkswagen K70|K70]]
|[[File:1971 VW K70 L Front.JPG|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1970–1974
|-
|[[Volkswagen 412|412]]
|[[File:Typ 4 412 Variant aus Offenbach.JPG|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1972–1974
|-
|[[Volkswagen Scirocco|Scirocco]]
|[[File:1974 VOLKSWAGEN SCIROCCO.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1974–1981
|-
|[[Volkswagen Derby|Derby]]
|[[File:VW Derby CL front.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1977–1981
|-
|[[Volkswagen Corrado|Corrado]]
|[[File:VW Corrado 16 V (2010-04-12) ret2.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1988–1995
|-
|[[Volkswagen Lupo|Lupo]]
|[[File:Vw lupo v sst.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1998–2004
|-
|[[Volkswagen New Beetle|New Beetle]]
|[[File:2006-2007 Volkswagen New Beetle.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|1998–2010
|-
|[[Volkswagen Golf Plus|Golf +]]
|[[File:VW Golf Plus 2.0 TDI Facelift front-1 20100710.jpg|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|2004-2009
|-
|[[Volkswagen Routan|Routan]]
|[[File:2009 Volkswagen Routan SE.jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|2009-2013
|-
|[[Volkswagen Eos|Eos]]
|[[File:2012 Volkswagen Eos -- 04-01-2011 1.jpg|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|2006-2015
|-
|[[Volkswagen Phaeton|Phaeton]]
|[[File:VW Phaeton 3.0 V6 TDI 4MOTION (2. Facelift) – Frontansicht, 10. August 2011,
Düsseldorf.jpg|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|2003-2016
|-
|[[Volkswagen CC|CC]]
|[[File:Volkswagen Passat CC 2.0 TSi 2010
(14168908053).jpg|centre|frameless|upright=0.4]]
|2008-2017
|}

==Electric and alternative fuel vehicles==

===Neat ethanol vehicles===
[[File:Bundesarchiv B 145 Bild-F053242-0034, Hannover, Messe.jpg|thumb|right| VW neat
[[ethanol fuel|ethanol]] prototype car developed by [[Volkswagen do Brasil]] in
1978.]]

[[Volkswagen do Brasil]] produced and sold neat ethanol-powered, ([[Neat alcohol
fuel|E100 only]]), vehicles in Brazil, and production was discontinued only after
they were supplanted by more modern [[flexible-fuel vehicle|Flex Fuel]] technology.
As a response to the [[1973 oil crisis]], the Brazilian government began promoting
bioethanol as a fuel, and the [[Pro-Álcool|National Alcohol Program]]
-''Pró-Álcool''- ({{lang-pt|Programa Nacional do Álcool}}) was launched in 1975.<ref
name="Bastos">{{cite web|url=http://www.energytribune.com/articles.cfm?aid=534
|author=Milton Briquet Bastos |title=Brazil's Ethanol Program – An Insider's View
|publisher=Energy Tribune |date=20 June 2007 |accessdate=14 August 2008 |deadurl=yes
|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20110710193215/http://www.energytribune.com/articles.cfm?aid=534
|archivedate=10 July 2011 }}</ref><ref name="Veja1979" /><ref name="SeatleT" />
Compelled by the [[1979 energy crisis]], and after development and testing with
government fleets by the [[Brazilian General Command for Aerospace Technology|CTA]]
at [[São José dos Campos]], and further testing of several prototypes developed by
the four local carmakers, including Volkswagen do Brasil, neat ethanol vehicles were
launched in the Brazilian market.<ref name="Bastos" /><ref name="Veja1979">{{cite web
|url=http://veja.abril.com.br/idade/exclusivo/petroleo/130679.html |title=O petróleo
da cana |author=Revista Veja |publisher=[[Editora Abril]] |date=13 June 1979
|accessdate=29 November 2008 |language=Portuguese |authorlink=Revista Veja
|deadurl=yes
|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20081006165850/http://veja.abril.com.br/idade/exclusivo/petroleo/130679.html
|archivedate=6 October 2008 |df=dmy-all }}</ref> Gasoline engines were modified to
support [[hydrous]] ethanol characteristics and changes included [[compression
ratio]], amount of fuel injected, replacement of materials that would get corroded by
the contact with ethanol, use of colder [[spark plugs]] suitable for dissipating heat
due to higher flame temperatures, and an auxiliary cold-start system that injects
gasoline from a small tank in the engine compartment to help starting when cold.
Within six years, around 75% of all Brazilian passenger cars were manufactured with
ethanol engines.<ref name="Bastos" /><ref name="Lemos">{{cite web|
url=http://www.icis.com/Articles/2007/02/12/4500680/the-brazilian-ethanol-model.html
| author=William Lemos |title=The Brazilian ethanol model |publisher=ICIS news |
date=5 February 2007 | accessdate=14 August 2008 }}</ref>

Production and sales of neat ethanol vehicles tumbled beginning in 1987 owing to
several factors, including a sharp decline in gasoline prices as a result of the
[[1980s oil glut]], and high sugar prices in the world market, shifting sugarcane
ethanol production from fuel to sugar. By mid-1989, a shortage of ethanol fuel supply
in the local market left thousands of vehicles in line at gas stations or out of fuel
in their garages, forcing consumers to abandon ethanol vehicles.<ref
name="SeatleT">{{cite
web|url=http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/nationworld/2002339093_brazilfuel17.html
|publisher=The Seattle Times |title=Brazil's ethanol effort helping lead to oil
self-sufficiency |author=Marla Dickerson |date=17 June 2005 |accessdate=29 November
2008 |deadurl=yes
|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20081227203948/http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/nationworld/2002339093_brazilfuel17.html
|archivedate=27 December 2008 |df= }}</ref><ref name="Veja1989">{{cite
web|url=http://veja.abril.com.br/arquivo_veja/capa_24051989.shtml |title=Um sonho
corroído |author=Revista Veja |publisher=[[Editora Abril]] |date=24 May 1989
|accessdate=29 November 2008 |language=Portuguese |authorlink=Revista Veja
|deadurl=yes
|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20090208192704/http://veja.abril.com.br/arquivo_veja/capa_24051989.shtml
|archivedate=8 February 2009 |df= }}</ref>

===Flexible-fuel vehicles===
[[File:Brazilian 2003 VW Gol 1.6 Total Flex.jpg|thumb|right]]

The 2003 [[Volkswagen Gol|VW Gol 1.6 Total Flex]] was the first full flexible-fuel
vehicle launched in Brazil, capable of running on any blend of gasoline and [[Neat
alcohol fuel|E100]]. In March of that year, on its fiftieth anniversary, [[Volkswagen
do Brasil]] launched in the local market the [[Volkswagen Gol|Gol]] 1.6 Total Flex,
the first Brazilian commercial [[flexible fuel vehicle]] capable of running on any
mix of [[E20 fuel|E20-E25]] gasoline and up to 100% [[hydrous]] ethanol fuel
([[Common ethanol fuel mixtures#E2100|E100]]).<ref name="SusEthanol">{{Cite
journal|author1=Goettemoeller, Jeffrey |author2=Adrian Goettemoeller | title =
Sustainable Ethanol: Biofuels, Biorefineries, Cellulosic Biomass, Flex-Fuel Vehicles,
and Sustainable Farming for Energy Independence | year = 2007| publisher=Prairie Oak
Publishing, Maryville, Missouri |pages=56–61 | postscript = <!--None--> |
isbn=978-0-9786293-0-4}}</ref><ref name="autonews.com">{{cite
web|url=http://www.autonews.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20060323/REUTERS/60323043/1111
|title=Volkswagen to stop making gas-only cars for Brazil |publisher=Automotive News
|date=23 March 2006 |accessdate=18 October 2008 }} {{Dead link|date=September
2010|bot=H3llBot}}</ref><ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.vwbr.com.br/VWBrasil/Historia/A-nova-Volkswagen.aspx |title=A Nova
Volkswagen |publisher=Volkswagen do Brasil |accessdate=18 October 2008
|language=Portuguese
|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20080915184129/http://www.vwbr.com.br/VWBrasil/Historia/A-nova-Volkswagen.aspx
<!--Added by H3llBot--> |archivedate=15 September 2008}}</ref><ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.parana-online.com.br/canal/automoveis/news/170341/
|title=Volkswagen lança Golf Total Flex 1.6
 |publisher=ParanaOnline |date=30 March 2006 |accessdate=18 October 2008
|language=Portuguese }}</ref> After the neat ethanol fiasco, consumer confidence in
ethanol-powered vehicles was restored, allowing a rapid adoption of the flex
technology. This was facilitated by the fuel distribution infrastructure already in
place throughout Brazil, with more than 30 thousand fueling stations, a heritage of
the ''Pró-Álcool'' program<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.amda.org.br/assets/files/gASOLINA.pdf |format=PDF |author1=Henry
Xavier Corseuil |author2=Marcus Sal Molin Marins |lastauthoramp=yes
|title=Contaminação de Águas Subterrâneas por Derramamentos de Gasolina: O problema é
grave? |publisher=Amda.org |year=1997 |language=Portuguese |accessdate=13 September
2008 |df= }}{{dead link|date=June 2017|bot=medic}}{{cbignore|bot=medic}}</ref><ref
name="BRgas08">{{cite
web|url=http://www.gazeta.com.br/GZM_News.aspx?Parms=2108086,604,1 |title=Margem
estreita não intimida pequenas |publisher=Gazeta Mercantil |author=Roberta Scrivano
|date=7 October 2008 |accessdate=26 November 2008 |language=Portuguese }}{{dead
link|date=May 2017 |bot=InternetArchiveBot |fix-attempted=yes }}</ref>

Owing to the success and rapid consumer acceptance of the flex-fuel versions, by 2005
VW had sold 293,523 flex-fuel cars and light-duty trucks, and only 53,074
gasoline-only automobiles,<ref name="ANFAVEA05">{{cite web|
url=http://www.anfavea.com.br/tabelas2005/autoveiculos/tabela08_vendas.pdf|format=PDF|
title=Tabela 08 – Vendas Atacado Mercado Interno por Tipo e Empresa – Combustível
Flex Fuel – 2005 |publisher=ANFAVEA – Associação Nacional dos Fabricantes de Veículos
Automotores (Brazil)|accessdate=16 April 2009 |language=Portuguese}}  ''See Table 08
for flex-fuel sales and Table 07 for gasoline sales''.</ref> jumping to 525,838
flex-fuel vehicles and only 13,572 gasoline-only cars and 248 gasoline-only light
trucks in 2007,<ref name="ANFAVEA07">{{cite web|
url=http://www.anfavea.com.br/tabelas2007/autoveiculos/tabela08_vendas.pdf|format=PDF|
title=Tabela 08 – Vendas Atacado Mercado Interno por Tipo e Empresa – Combustível
Flex Fuel – 2007 |publisher=ANFAVEA – Associação Nacional dos Fabricantes de Veículos
Automotores (Brazil)|accessdate=16 April 2009 |language=Portuguese}}  ''See Table 08
for flex-fuel sales and Table 07 for gasoline sales''.</ref> and reaching new car
sales of 564,959 flex-fuel vehicles in 2008, representing 96% of all new cars and
light-duty trucks sold in that year.<ref name="ANFAVEA08">{{cite web|
url=http://www.anfavea.com.br/tabelas2008/autoveiculos/tabela08_vendas.pdf|format=PDF|
title=Tabela 08 – Vendas Atacado Mercado Interno por Tipo e Empresa – Combustível
Flex Fuel – 2008 |publisher=ANFAVEA – Associação Nacional dos Fabricantes de Veículos
Automotores (Brazil)|accessdate=16 April 2009 |language=Portuguese}}  ''See Table
08''.</ref> VW do Brasil stopped manufacturing gasoline-only vehicles models for the
local market in 2006,<ref name="autonews.com" /> and all of the remaining
gasoline-only Volkswagen models sold in Brazil are imported. The flex-fuel models
currently produced for the local market are the Gol, Fox, CrossFox, Parati, Polo
Hatch, Polo Sedan, Saveiro, Golf, and Kombi.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.norpave.com.br/site/index.php?modulo=detalhe_noticia&id=24
|title=VW completa 55 anos como maior montadora do País |publisher=Norpave VW
|date=25 March 2008 |accessdate=18 April 2009 |language=Portuguese}} {{Dead
link|date=September 2010|bot=H3llBot}}</ref> By March 2009, Volkswagen do Brasil had
attained the milestone mark of two million flex-fuel vehicles produced since
2003.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://autobrasil.wordpress.com/2009/03/25/vw-dois-milhoes-de-carros-flex/|title=VW:
dois milhões de carros flex |publisher=Auto Brasil |date=25 March 2009 |accessdate=19
April 2009|language=Portuguese}}</ref><ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.noticiasautomotivas.com.br/volkswagen-atinge-2-milhoes-de-carros-flex-produzidos-no-brasil/|title=Volkswagen
atinge 2 milhões de carros Flex produzidos no Brasil |publisher=Noticias Automotivas
|date=24 March 2009 |accessdate=18 April 2009 |language=Portuguese}}</ref>

===Hybrid vehicles===
[[File:VW Jetta Hybrid WAS 2012 0710.JPG|thumb|left|The Volkswagen Jetta Hybrid gets
48 mpg highway.]]

Volkswagen and [[Sanyo]] have teamed up to develop a battery system for [[hybrid
electric vehicle|hybrid cars]].<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.theautochannel.com/news/2006/02/03/209275.html |title=Volkswagen
and Sanyo Team Up To Develop Hybrid Battery Systems |publisher=Theautochannel.com
|accessdate=27 September 2010}}</ref> Volkswagen head [[Martin Winterkorn]] has
confirmed the company plans to build compact hybrid electric vehicles. He has stated
"There will definitely be compact hybrid models, such as [[Volkswagen Polo|Polo]] and
[[Volkswagen Golf|Golf]], and without any great delay", with gasoline and [[diesel
engine|diesel]] power. For example, Golf is the ideal model to go hybrid as the Golf
1.4 TSI was recently awarded the "Auto Environment Certificate" by the Oko-Trend
Institute for Environmental Research, and was considered as one of the most
environmentally friendly vehicles of 2007.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.green-hybrid-cars.com/volkswagen-hybrid.html |title="Volkswagen
Hybrid: Runaway Winner". Eco-Friendly Hybrid Cars, 2 May 2008
|publisher=Green-hybrid-cars.com |accessdate=27 September 2010}}</ref>  Also underway
at Volkswagen's [[Braunschweig]] [[Research and development|R&D]] facilities in
Northern Germany is a hybrid version of the next-generation [[Volkswagen
Touareg|Touareg]].<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.edmunds.com/insideline/do/News/articleId=119559 |title=Compact
Hybrid Coming From Volkswagen |publisher=Edmunds.com |date=22 January 2009
|accessdate=27 September 2010 |deadurl=yes
|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20090217073817/http://www.edmunds.com/insideline/do/News/articleId%3D119559
|archivedate=17 February 2009 |df= }}</ref>

VW intends all future models to have the hybrid option.  "Future VW models will
fundamentally also be constructed with hybrid concepts," VW head of development
Ulrich Hackenberg told ''Automobilwoche'' in an interview. Hackenberg mentioned that
the car based on the [[Volkswagen up!|Up!]] concept seen at [[Frankfurt Motor
Show]],<ref>{{cite web|url=http://www.edmunds.com/insideline/do/News/articleId=122568
|title=2007 Frankfurt Auto Show: Volkswagen Up! |publisher=Edmunds.com |date=11
September 2007 |accessdate=27 September 2010 |deadurl=yes
|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20090301021345/http://www.edmunds.com/insideline/do/News/articleId%3D122568
|archivedate=1 March 2009 |df= }}</ref> as well as all future models, could be
offered with either full or partial hybrid options. The rear-engine up! will go into
production in 2011. Nothing has been said about [[plug-in hybrid]]
options.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.egmcartech.com/2007/09/24/report-all-volkswagen-models-to-have-hybrid-option/
|title=Report: All Volkswagen models to have hybrid option |publisher=eGMCarTech
|date=24 September 2007 |accessdate=27 September 2010}}</ref>

Volkswagen announced at the [[Geneva Motor Show#010|2010 Geneva Motor Show]] the
launch of the 2012 [[Volkswagen Touareg#Touareg V6 TSI Hybrid (2009)|Touareg
Hybrid]], scheduled for 2011.<ref>{{Cite
news|url=http://wheels.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/03/05/geneva-auto-show-2011-vw-touareg-and-2012-touareg-hybrid/?scp=1&sq=2011%20Volkswagen%20Touareg%20Hybrid&st=cse|title=Geneva
Auto Show: 2011 VW Touareg and 2012 Touareg Hybrid|author=Nick Kurczewski|work=New
York Times |date=5 March 2010|accessdate=26 March 2010}}</ref><ref>{{Cite
news|url=http://www.motortrend.com/roadtests/suvs/1003_2011_volkswagen_touareg_hybrid_drive/index.html
|title=First Drive: 2011 Volkswagen Touareg|author=Scott Evans|publisher=[[Motor
Trend]]|date=March 2010|accessdate=26 March 2010}}</ref> VW also announced plans to
introduce [[diesel fuel|diesel]]-electric hybrid versions of its most popular models
in 2012, beginning with the new [[Volkswagen Jetta|Jetta]], followed by the
[[Volkswagen Golf|Golf Hybrid]] in 2013 together with hybrid versions of the
[[Volkswagen Polo|Passat]].<ref name=Parkers>{{cite
web|url=http://www.parkers.co.uk/News/News/VW-hybridelectric-cars/ |title=VW to
launch hybrid Jetta in 2012 |publisher=Parker's |accessdate=26 March 2010
|deadurl=yes
|archiveurl=https://archive.is/20130114061853/http://www.parkers.co.uk/News/News/VW-hybridelectric-cars/
|archivedate=14 January 2013 |df= }}</ref><ref name=AECs>{{cite
web|url=http://www.allcarselectric.com/blog/1043442_vw-to-focus-on-several-electric-and-hybrid-vehicle-launches-including-golf-jetta-passat-and-more
|title=VW To Focus on Several Electric and Hybrid Vehicle Launches Including Golf,
Jetta, Passat and More |author=Motor Authority|publisher=All Cars Electric|date=17
March 2010|accessdate=26 March 2010}}</ref> In 2012, the Volkswagen Jetta Hybrid set
the world record to become the fastest hybrid car at 187&nbsp;mph.

===Plug-in electric vehicles===

In November 2009, Volkswagen announced it has hired Karl-Thomas Neumann as its group
chief officer for [[electric traction]].<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://rumors.automobilemag.com/6605889/news/volkswagen-hires-new-electric-vehicle-chief/index.html
|title=Volkswagen Hires New Electric Vehicle Chief – Automotive News & Car Rumors at
Automobile Magazine |publisher=Rumors.automobilemag.com |date=12 November 2009
|accessdate=22 December 2009}}</ref> VW's Chief of research, Jürgen Leohold, said in
2010 the company has concluded [[fuel-cell vehicle|hydrogen fuel-cell cars]] are not
a viable option.<ref>{{cite web|url=http://www.calcars.org/calcars-news/876.html
|title=Audi's PHEV Concept; Volkswagen Research Chief Criticizes Fuel Cells
|publisher=Calcars.org |accessdate=27 September 2010}}</ref><ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.autocar.co.uk/News/NewsArticle/Volkswagen-Concepts/229005/
|title=Fuel cell cars won't save the world |publisher=Autocar.co.uk |date=6 November
2007 |accessdate=27 September 2010}}</ref>

[[File:Black VW Golf GTE charging fl.jpg|thumbnail|[[Volkswagen Golf GTE]] [[plug-in
hybrid]] charging.]]

{{As of|2016|05}}, the [[Volkswagen Group]] offers for retails customers nine
[[plug-in electric car]]s, of which, three are [[all-electric car]]s: the
[[Volkswagen e-Up!]], [[Volkswagen e-Golf|e-Golf]] and [[Audi R8 e-tron]], and six
are [[plug-in hybrid]]s: the [[Volkswagen Golf GTE]], [[Volkswagen Passat GTE|Passat
GTE]], [[Audi A3 Sportback e-tron]], [[Audi Q7 e-tron|Q7 e-tron quattro]], [[Porsche
Panamera S E-Hybrid]] and [[Porsche Cayenne S E-Hybrid|Cayenne S E-Hybrid]].<ref
name=VWPEVs>{{cite news |
url=http://www.autonews.com/article/20160529/OEM05/305309985/vw-goal:-1-million-electrified-vehicles-by-2025
| title=VW goal: 1 million electrified vehicles by 2025 | first=Christiaan | last=
Hetzner | work=[[Automotive News]] | date=2016-05-29 | accessdate=2016-05-29}}</ref>
Also two limited production plug-in hybrids were manufactured beginning in 2013, the
[[Volkswagen XL1]] (250 units) and the [[Porsche 918 Spyder]] (918 units).<ref>{{cite
news|url=
http://www.automobilwoche.de/article/20131009/NACHRICHTEN/131009943/vergabe-der-kleinstserie-vw-lenkt-xl-1-fans-auf-zielgerade#.UmvjOHCkpwt
|title=Vergabe der Kleinstserie: VW lenkt XL-1-Fans auf
Zielgerade|language=German|trans-title=Allocation of micro series: VW XL1 draws fans
to finish line|author=Henning
Kroghhkrogh|work=Automobilwoche|date=2013-10-09|accessdate=2013-10-26}}</ref><ref>{{cite
web|url= http://www.autoblog.com/2012/10/01/2014-porsche-918-spyder-deep-dive-review/
|title=2014 Porsche 918 Spyder|author=Michael Harley |publisher=[[Autoblog.com]]
|date=2012-10-01 |accessdate=2012-10-14}}</ref> Total cumulative sales of all
Volkswagen brand [[electric vehicle|electrified cars]] since the start of their
respective production is expected to reach about 103,000 by the end of 2016.<ref
name=VWPEVs/>

In order to comply with increasingly strict carbon dioxide emission limits in major
markets, the VW Group expects to sell about one million all-electric and plug-in
hybrid vehicles a year worldwide by 2025. The Group plans to expand its plug-in range
with 20 new pure electric and plug-in hybrid cars, including two cars to compete with
[[Tesla Motors]], the [[Porsche Mission E]] all-electric car and the [[Audi e-tron]]
quattro, which is expected to become the brand's first mass production electric
vehicle. According to Thomas Ulbrich, VW brand production chief, the carmaker has
capacitty to build as many as 75,000 battery electric and plug-in hybrids a year if
demand rises. Volkswagen announced in October 2015 that "it will develop a modular
architecture for battery electric cars, called the MEB. The standardized system will
be designed for all body structures and vehicle types and will allow the company to
build emotionally appealing EVs with a range of up to
{{convert|310|mi|abbr=on}}."<ref name=VWPEVs/> In June 2016, VW launched a program to
develop 30 all-electric cars in 10 years, and sell 2-3 million electric cars per year
by 2025.<ref>{{cite web
|url=http://www.volkswagenag.com/content/vwcorp/info_center/en/news/2016/06/2025.html
|title=Archived copy |accessdate=2016-06-20 |deadurl=yes
|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20160621062535/http://www.volkswagenag.com/content/vwcorp/info_center/en/news/2016/06/2025.html
|archivedate=21 June 2016 |df=dmy-all }} </ref> Due to lower manpower requirements
for electric motors than for piston engines, VW expects a gradual workforce reduction
as numbers of electric cars increase.<ref>{{cite
web|url=https://www.reuters.com/article/us-volkswagen-jobs-idUSKCN12S1QP |title=VW HR
chief says expects five-digit number of job cuts: FAZ|date=29 October
2016|work=Reuters|accessdate=1 November 2016}}</ref><ref>{{cite web|url=
http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/neue-mobilitaet/vw-personalchef-elektromobilitaet-wird-zehntausende-jobs-kosten-14502483.html
|title=VW-Personalchef: Elektromobilität wird Zehntausende Jobs kosten|date=28
October 2016|work=FAZ.NET |accessdate=1 November 2016}}</ref> VW considers battery
factory ownership as too expensive.<ref>{{cite web|url=
http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/neue-mobilitaet/osterloh-besteht-auf-bau-einer-batteriefabrik-14486729.html
|title=Osterloh besteht auf Bau einer Batteriefabrik|date=18 October
2016|work=FAZ.NET |accessdate=1 November 2016}}</ref>

==Environmental record==
[[File:VW XL 1 vr.JPG|thumb|right|The [[Volkswagen XL1]], with potential mileage as
high as 261 mpg, is the most fuel-efficient car in the world]]

In 1974 Volkswagen paid a $120,000 fine to settle a complaint filed by the
Environmental Protection Agency over the use of so-called "defeat devices" that
disabled certain pollution-control systems. The complaint said the use of the devices
violated the U.S. Clean Air Act.
<ref>{{cite web|title=VW had previous run-in over 'defeat
devices'|url=https://www.cnbc.com/2015/09/23/vw-had-previous-run-in-over-defeat-devices.html|website=CNBC.COM|publisher=CNBC|accessdate=18
October 2015}}</ref>

In 1996, Volkswagen first implemented its seven environmental goals in Technical
Development with themes involving climate protection, resource conservation, and
healthcare, through objectives such as reducing greenhouse emissions and fuel
consumption, enabling alternative fuels, and avoiding hazardous materials.<ref
name=Volkswagen_Environment>{{cite
web|url=http://www.volkswagen.com/vwcms/master_public/virtualmaster/en2/unternehmen/mobility_and_sustainability0/management___daten/management_und_verantwortung/Umweltziele.html
|title=Volkswagen Environmental |author=Volkswagen |publisher=Volkswagen |date=12
December 2010 |accessdate=12 December 2010 |deadurl=yes
|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20110226110727/http://www.volkswagen.com/vwcms/master_public/virtualmaster/en2/unternehmen/mobility_and_sustainability0/management___daten/management_und_verantwortung/Umweltziele.html
|archivedate=26 February 2011 }}</ref> The goals have been revised in 2002 and 2007.
Volkswagen was the first car manufacturer to apply [[ISO 14000]], during its drafting
stage and was re-certified under the standards in September 2005.{{cn|date=July
2017}}

In 2011, [[Greenpeace]] began criticising Volkswagen's opposition to legislation
requiring tighter controls on CO2 emissions and energy efficiency, and launched an
advertising campaign parodying VW's series of ''[[Star Wars]]''-based
commercials.<ref name=Volkswagen_Environment /><ref>{{cite
web|url=http://vwdarkside.com |title= Volkswagen. The Dark Side. |
publisher=Greenpeace |accessdate=31 March 2012}}</ref>

In 2013, the Volkswagen XL1 became the most fuel-efficient production car in the
world, with a claimed combined fuel consumption of 261 mpg (0.90
liter/100&nbsp;km).<ref>{{cite web|title=The most fuel efficient car in the world:
Volkswagen XL1 does 300 MILES to the gallon (and it looks cool too)
|url=http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2540618/The-fuel-efficient-car-world-Volkswagen-XL1-does-300-MILES-gallon-looks-cool-too.html|website=Daily
Mail|accessdate=21 February 2015|date=16 January 2014}}</ref> [[Energy-efficient
driving|Driving style]] has huge impact on this result - "normal" driving produces
mileage in the 120 mpg range (1.96 liter/100&nbsp;km) <ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.automobilemag.com/reviews/driven/1307_2014_volkswagen_xl1/|title=2014
Volkswagen XL1 First Drive|date=20 May 2013|work=Automobile|accessdate=22 September
2015}}</ref>

{{asof|2014}}, VW is registered with a [[Corporate Average Fuel Economy]] (CAFE) of
34<!--US-->-38<!--imported--> mpg in USA.<ref>Hicks, Maurice.
"[http://www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/rulemaking/pdf/cafe/Performance-summary-report-12152014-v2.pdf
NHTSA's Summary of Fuel Economy Performance]" page 9 ''[[NHTSA]]''/[[CAFE]]. December
2014</ref>

===Diesel emission violations===
{{main article|Volkswagen emissions scandal}}
{{wikinews|Volkswagen engulfed by diesel emissions scandal}}
On 18 September 2015, the [[United States Environmental Protection Agency]] (EPA)
said beginning in 2008 the automaker improperly installed [[engine control unit]]
(ECU) software determined to be a "defeat device", in violation of the [[Clean Air
Act (United States)|Clean Air Act]] to circumvent environmental regulations of
[[NOx|NO<sub>''x''</sub>]] emissions by [[diesel engine]] 2009-2015 model year
Volkswagen and Audi cars. The software detects when the cars were being subject to
emissions testing, and then fully enabled ECU emission controls to successfully
pass.<ref>{{cite news|title=Auto expert: 'A conscious breach of US
law'|url=http://www.dw.com/en/auto-expert-a-conscious-breach-of-us-law/a-18728394|publisher=Deutsche
Welle|date=21 September 2015}}</ref><ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.greencarcongress.com/2015/09/20150918-epaarb.html|title=Green Car
Congress: EPA and California ARB charge Volkswagen with using software defeat device
to circumvent NOx testing in 4-cylinder 2.0L
dieselss|website=Greencarcongress.com|accessdate=2017-07-24}}</ref> However, during
normal driving conditions, emission control software was shut off in order to attain
greater fuel economy and additional power, resulting in as much as 40 times more
pollution than allowed by law.<ref>Krall JR, Peng RD. The Volkswagen scandal:
Deception, driving and deaths. Significance. 2015;12(6):12-5.</ref><ref>{{cite
web|title = VW, Audi Cited by EPA for Cheating on Diesel Emissions Tests|url =
http://www.consumerreports.org/cro/cars/vw--audi-cited-by-epa-for-cheating-on-diesel-emissions-tests
|accessdate = 2015-09-26}}</ref> ''[[Consumer Reports]]'' tested a 2011 Jetta
SportWagen TDI and found in emissions mode its 0-60&nbsp;mph time increased by 0.6
seconds and its highway fuel economy dropped from 50 mpg to 46 mpg.<ref
name=Fisher2015>{{Citation
|url=http://www.consumerreports.org/cro/cars/testing-volkswagen-diesel-fuel-economy-and-performance-in-cheat-mode
|title= Consumer Reports Tests VW Diesel Fuel Economy, Performance in 'Cheat' Mode;
Tests reveal different results when the 'cheat' settings are used in the real world
|first=Jake |last= Fisher |date=9 October 2015 |magazine=[[Consumer Reports]]
}}</ref> Volkswagen admitted to using the defeat device, and has been ordered to
recall approximately 482,000 cars with four-cylinder 2.0-liter [[Turbocharged Direct
Injection|TDI]] engines.<ref>{{cite news|last1=Ewing|first1=Jack|title=Volkswagen
Says 11 Million Cars Worldwide Are Affected in Diesel
Deception|url=https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/23/business/international/volkswagen-diesel-car-scandal.html
|work=New York Times|date=September 22, 2015}}</ref> United States federal penalties
may include fines ranging up to US$18{{nbsp}}billion, and possibly criminal
charges.<ref name="NYT EPA">{{Cite news|
url=https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/19/business/volkswagen-is-ordered-to-recall-nearly-500000-vehicles-over-emissions-software.html|
title=VW Is Said to Cheat on Diesel Emissions; U.S. Orders Big Recall| first1=Coral|
last1=Davenport |first2=Jack| last2=Ewing| newspaper=[[New York Times]]|date=18
September 2015|accessdate=18 September 2015}}</ref> On June 28, 2016, Volkswagen
agreed to pay a settlement of $15.3 billion, the largest auto-related consumer
class-action lawsuit in the United States history.<ref>{{cite web|author=Michael
Lewis
|url=https://www.thestar.com/business/2016/06/28/volkswagen-agrees-to-landmark-147-billion-emissions-settlement-in-us.html
|title=Volkswagen agrees to landmark $15.3-billion emissions settlement in U.S.
|website=Thestar.com |date=2016-06-28 |accessdate=2017-07-24}}</ref>

In May 2014, the EPA was first alerted to the issue by the [[International Council on
Clean Transportation]] (ICCT), reporting results<ref name="CAFEE">{{Cite report|
url=http://www.theicct.org/sites/default/files/publications/WVU_LDDV_in-use_ICCT_Report_Final_may2014.pdf|
title=In-Use Emissions Testing of Light-Duty Diesel Vehicles in the United States|
first1=Gregory J.| last1=Thompson| first2=Daniel K.| last2=Carder| first3=Marc C.|
last3=Besch| first4=Arvind| last4=Thiruvengadam| first5=Hemanth K.| last5=Kappanna|
publisher=Center for Alternative Fuels, Engines and Emissions (CAFEE), [[University
of West Virginia]]| date=18 September 2015| accessdate=18 September 2015}}</ref> of
research commissioned for them by [[West Virginia University]]'s Center for
Alternative Fuels, Engines and Emissions (CAFEE).<ref name="CandD">{{Cite news|
url=http://blog.caranddriver.com/volkswagen-allegedly-openly-violated-epa-diesel-laws-could-face-billions-in-fines/|
title=Volkswagen Allegedly Openly Violated EPA Diesel Laws, Could Face Billions in
Fines| first1=Clifford| last1=Atiyeh | magazine=Car and Driver|date=18 September
2015|accessdate=18 September 2015}}</ref><ref>{{cite
web|url=http://cafee.wvu.edu/|title=WVU Center for Alternative Fuels Engines and
Emissions|website=Cafee.wvu.edu|accessdate=22 September 2015}}</ref> After 15 months
of denying the emissions control systems were deliberately gamed and instead claiming
discrepancies due to "technical" reasons, on August 21 Volkswagen acknowledged to the
EPA and [[California Air Resources Board]] (CARB) their emission controls systems
were rigged. This was followed by a formal announcement of admission to regulators on
September 3 which took place immediately after the EPA threatened to withhold
approval for their 2016 cars.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.autonews.com/article/20150924/OEM/150929873/vw-after-a-year-of-stonewalling-stunned-u-s-regulators-with|title=VW,
after a year of stonewalling, stunned U.S. regulators with
confession|website=Autonews.com|accessdate=2017-07-24}}</ref> Volkswagen's initial
public response came on 20 September, when a spokesman said they would stop all US
sales of the diesel models affected. Chairman Martin Winterkorn issued an apology and
said Volkswagen would cooperate with investigators.<ref name=Ewing2015a>{{Citation
|title= Volkswagen to Stop Sales of Diesel Cars Involved in Recall |first1= Jack
|last1=Ewing |first2=Coral |last2= Davenport |date= 20 September 2015 |url=
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/21/business/international/volkswagen-chief-apologizes-for-breach-of-trust-after-recall.html
|newspaper= [[New York Times]] }}</ref> Since emission standards in Canada are close
to those in the US, Volkswagen Canada also halted sales of the affected diesel
models.<ref>{{cite
news|url=http://www.cbc.ca/news/business/volkswagen-emissions-rigging-1.3236548
|title=Volkswagen Canada halts some sales as emissions rigging scandal
deepens|date=22 September 2015|website=Cbc.ca|accessdate=22 September 2015}}</ref> on
22 September 2015, Volkswagen spokesman admitted that the defeat device is installed
in ~11 million vehicles with Type [[EA 189]] diesel engines worldwide.<ref>{{cite
web|url=https://www.wsj.com/articles/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-relates-to-11-million-cars-1442916906
|title=Volkswagen Emissions Scandal Relates to 11 Million Cars|author1=William Boston
|author2=Sarah Sloat |lastauthoramp=yes |date=22 September 2015|work=WSJ}}</ref>

On the first business day after the news, Volkswagen's stock price declined 20% and
declined another 17% the following day, the same day a social media advertisement
with ''[[Wired (magazine)|Wired]]'' about "how diesel was re-engineered" was removed
as well as a series of [[YouTube]] ads titled "Diesel Old Wives’ Tales".<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://adage.com/article/cmo-strategy/wired-s-native-ad-volkswagen-diesel-tech-missing/300496/|title=Wired's
Native Ad for Volkswagen Diesel Tech Goes
Missing|website=Adage.com|accessdate=2017-07-24}}</ref><ref
name=Ewing2015b>{{Citation |title= Volkswagen Denied Deception to E.P.A. for Nearly a
Year |first1= Jack |last1=Ewing |date= 21 September 2015
|url=https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/22/business/international/volkswagen-shares-recall.html
|newspaper= [[New York Times]] }}</ref><ref>{{cite web|title = Why Did Volkswagen
Delete All Of Its Diesel Ads From YouTube?|url =
http://jalopnik.com/why-did-volkswagen-delete-all-of-its-diesel-ads-from-yo-1731691453|accessdate
= 2015-09-26|first = Michael|last = Ballaban}}</ref> On Wednesday, 23 September,
Volkswagen chief executive officer [[Martin Winterkorn]] resigned.<ref
name=VWrefuses>{{Citation |title= Volkswagen chief executive Martin Winterkorn
resigns |date= 23 September 2015 |url=http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-34340997
|newspaper= [[BBC UK]] }}</ref> Volkswagen hired [[Kirkland & Ellis]] law firm for
defense, the same firm that defended [[BP]] during the [[Deepwater Horizon oil
spill]].<ref>{{cite web|url=http://www.autonews.com/article/20150923/OEM01/150929934
|title=Volkswagen hires law firm that defended BP after oil spill|work=Automotive
News}}</ref>

On November 2, 2016, the EPA issued a second notice of violation (NOV) pertaining to
certain diesel 3.0-liter [[V6]] equipped Audi, [[Volkswagen Touareg]] and [[Porsche
Cayenne]] vehicles.<ref>{{cite web
|url=http://yosemite.epa.gov/opa/admpress.nsf/0/4A45A5661216E66C85257EF10061867B
|title=Archived copy |accessdate=2015-11-03 |deadurl=yes
|archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20151105103847/http://yosemite.epa.gov/opa/admpress.nsf/0/4A45A5661216E66C85257EF10061867B
|archivedate=5 November 2015 |df=dmy-all }}</ref> The EPA found beginning with the
2009 model year all vehicles powered by the V6 were non-compliant.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.autonews.com/article/20151120/OEM11/151129977/vws-3-0-liter-diesels-under-wider-scrutiny-by-epa-carb|title=VW's
3.0-liter diesels under wider scrutiny by EPA,
CARB|website=Autonews.com|accessdate=2017-07-24}}</ref> During testing the EPA, CARB
and Transport Canada discovered software that activates pollution reduction systems
when the automobiles are being driven under federal test conditions, otherwise during
real world driving these devices are inactive.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.autonews.com/article/20151103/COPY01/311039953/vw-prepares-to-fight-latest-diesel-cheating-allegations|title=VW
prepares to fight latest diesel cheating
allegations|website=Autonews.com|accessdate=2017-07-24}}</ref><ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.autonews.com/article/20151102/OEM01/151109977/vw-porsche-audi-3-0-liter-diesels-also-have-defeat-devices-epa-says|title=VW,
Porsche, Audi 3.0-liter diesels also have 'defeat devices,' EPA
sayss|website=Autonews.com|accessdate=2017-07-24}}</ref> Volkswagen disputed the
EPA's findings stating their software was legally permitted,<ref>{{cite
web|url=https://www.wsj.com/articles/epa-notifies-volkswagen-of-added-emissions-violations-1446491504|title=EPA,
Volkswagen Spar Over New Emissions
Claims|first1=Mike|last1=Spector|first2=William|last2=Boston|date=4 November
2015|website=Wsj.com}}</ref> however shortly after Volkswagen issued a stop-sale for
the EPA's disputed vehicles and additional models the EPA did not
question.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.greencarreports.com/news/1100782_audi-porsche-vw-diesel-stop-sale-orders-more-cars-than-epa-named|title=Audi,
Porsche, VW Diesel Stop-Sale Orders: More Cars Than EPA
Named|website=Greencarreports.com|accessdate=2017-07-24}}</ref> 

In March 2016, the US [[Federal Trade Commission]] sued Volkswagen for false
advertising, because Volkswagen's "clean diesel" vehicles were less environmentally
friendly than advertised.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.autonews.com/article/20160329/RETAIL03/160329857/vws-u-s-arm-sued-by-ftc-over-clean-diesel-ads|title=VW's
U.S. arm sued by FTC over 'clean diesel'
ads|website=Autonews.com|accessdate=2017-07-24}}</ref>

In November 2016, Volkswagen and its labour unions agreed to reduce the workforce by
30,000 people until 2021 as a result of the costs from the violations. However, 9,000
new jobs would come by producing more electric cars.<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://fortune.com/2016/11/18/volkswagen-vw-job-cuts/ |title=Volkswagen Is
Said to Be Cutting 30,000 Jobs|date=18 November 2016|work=Fortune|accessdate=18
November 2016}}</ref> Volkswagen also announced plans to become the world leader in
electric cars, producing 1 million VW-EVs by 2025 and 3 million by the
group,<ref>DAVID McHUGH.
"[https://www.usnews.com/news/business/articles/2016-11-22/volkswagen-aims-to-go-electric-raise-lagging-profits
VW Betting on New Technology]" ''[[Associated Press]]'', 22 November 2016.</ref> and
a VW manager stated that its diesel cars would not become available in
USA.<ref>{{cite
web|url=https://global.handelsblatt.com/breaking/vw-to-withdraw-from-u-s-diesel-market
|title=VW to Withdraw from U.S. Diesel Market|work=[[Handelsblatt]] Global
Edition|accessdate=22 November 2016}}</ref>

On 11 January 2017, Volkswagen agreed to plead guilty to the emissions-cheating
scandal and to pay $4.3 billion in penalties. Six Volkswagen executives were
charged.<ref>{{cite news|last1=Ewing|first1=Hiroko Tabuchi,
Jack|last2=Apuzzo|first2=Matt|title=Six Volkswagen Executives Charged in Emissions
Scandal|url=https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/11/business/volkswagen-diesel-vw-settlement-charges-criminal.html?_r=0|accessdate=11
January 2017|work=The New York Times|date=11 January 2017}}</ref><ref>{{cite
news|last1=Shepardson|first1=David|title=U.S. indicts six as Volkswagen agrees to
$4.3 billion diesel
settlement|url=http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-volkswagen-emissions-idUKKBN14V2E0|accessdate=11
January 2017|work=Reuters UK}}</ref> The following day, one of the indicted
executives was ordered to be held without bail pending trial as it was feared that he
would flee to Germany and extradition would be impossible.<ref>{{cite
news|title=Judge denies bail for indicted Volkswagen
executive|url=http://hosted2.ap.org/APDEFAULT/386c25518f464186bf7a2ac026580ce7/Article_2017-01-12-US--Volkswagen-Emissions%20Scandal-Executive/id-3fe7c76adf684f558efec41a3eac788d|accessdate=12
January 2017|work=Associated Press|date=12 January 2017}}</ref><ref>{{cite
news|title=U.S. judge orders Volkswagen executive
detained|url=https://www.reuters.com/article/us-volkswagen-emissions-idUSKBN14W2YZ|accessdate=12
January 2017|work=Reuters|date=12 January 2017}}</ref> Senior VW management staff
were warned not to travel to the US.<ref>{{cite news|title=Senior VW managers warned
not to travel to U.S.:
sources|url=https://www.reuters.com/article/us-volkswagen-emissions-extradition-idUSKBN14X175|accessdate=13
January 2017|work=Reuters|date=13 January 2017}}</ref> On 23 January 2017, a US judge
approved a $1.2 billion settlement in which 650 American dealers, "who, like
consumers, were blindsided by the brazen fraud that VW perpetrated," would receive an
average of $1.85 million.<ref>{{cite news|title=U.S. judge approves Volkswagen
dealers $1.2 billion
settlement|url=https://www.reuters.com/article/us-volkswagen-emissions-idUSKBN1572SC|accessdate=24
January 2017|work=Reuters|date=24 January 2017}}</ref>

==Awards==
[[File:Volkswagen Polo 2011 (7708695660).jpg|thumb|right|The [[Volkswagen Polo]] in
Christchurch, New Zealand. The Volkswagen Polo won the 2010 World Car of the Year]]
[[File:VW take up! 1.0 – Frontansicht, 25. Februar 2012,
Düsseldorf.jpg|thumb|right|The [[Volkswagen up!]] won the 2012 World Car of the
Year]]

Volkswagen was named the fourth most influential car of the 20th century in the 1999
[[Car of the Century]] competition, for its [[Volkswagen Beetle|Volkswagen Type 1
'Beetle" model]]. It trailed only the [[Ford Model T]], BMC [[Mini]], and [[Citroën
DS]].<ref>{{cite
news|url=https://www.nytimes.com/1999/12/24/automobiles/this-just-in-model-t-gets-award.html|title=This
Just In: Model T Gets Award|first=James G.|last=Cobb|date=24 December
1999|newspaper=[[The New York Times]]}}</ref>

Volkswagen has produced three winners of the 50-year-old [[European Car of the Year]]
award.

{{unbulleted list|1992 - [[Volkswagen Golf]]|2010 - [[Volkswagen Polo]]|2013 -
[[Volkswagen Golf]]}}

Volkswagen has produced five winners of the United States [[Motor Trend Car of the
Year]] award&nbsp;— the original [[Car of the Year]] designation, which began in
1949.

{{unbulleted list|1985 - [[Volkswagen Golf|Volkswagen GTI]]|1999 - [[Volkswagen New
Beetle]] (Import COTY subgroup)|2004 - [[Volkswagen Touareg]] ([[Sport Utility
Vehicle]] COTY subgroup)  |2012 - [[Volkswagen Passat]]|2015 - [[Volkswagen
Golf#Seventh generation (A7, Typ 5G; 2013–present)|Volkswagen Golf
line-up]]<ref>{{cite
web|url=http://www.greencarcongress.com/2014/11/20141113-golf.html|title=Volkswagen
Golf family named "2015 Motor Trend Car of the Year" |author=Mike Millikin
|publisher=[[Green Car Congress]]|date=2014-11-13|accessdate=2014-11-15}}</ref>}}

Volkswagen has already produced four winners of the recently developed [[World Car of
the Year]] award.

{{unbulleted list|2009 - [[Volkswagen Golf]]|2010 - [[Volkswagen Polo]]|2012 -
[[Volkswagen up!]]|2013 - [[Volkswagen Golf]]}}

==Motorsport==
{{main article|Volkswagen Motorsport}}

===Formula racing===

* In 1963, [[Formula Vee]] circuit racing, with cars built from easily available
* [[Volkswagen Beetle#Power|Beetle]] parts, started in the United States. It quickly
* spread to Europe and other parts of the world. It proved very popular as a low-cost
* route into formula racing.<ref>{{cite
* web|url=http://www.formulaveesa.org.za/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=51&Itemid=62
* |title=South African Formula Vee History |publisher=Formulaveesa.org.za |date=17
* May 2009 |accessdate=27 September 2010 |deadurl=yes
* |archiveurl=https://www.webcitation.org/5DBVfgAaj?url=http://www.geeky.net/geeky.css
* |archivedate= 24 January 2006 }}</ref>
* In 1971, Volkswagen of America started the more powerful [[Formula Super Vee]],
* which became famous for hothousing new talent.{{citation needed|date=February
* 2015}} In the 11 years it ran, until 1982, it produced a stable of world-famous
* [[Formula One]] drivers—names like [[Niki Lauda]], [[Jochen Mass]], [[Nelson
* Piquet]], [[Jochen Rindt]] and [[Keke Rosberg]]. Volkswagen also notched up several
* victories, and the championship in [[Formula Three]].
* In July 2011 Wolfgang Dürheimer, the director of Bugatti and Bentley, told German
* magazine ''[[Auto, Motor und Sport]]'' that "if [the VW group] is at the forefront
* of the auto industry, I can imagine us competing in Formula 1 in 2018.  We have
* enough brands to pull it off."<ref>{{cite web|title=Volkswagen in F1 by 2018?
* |url=http://europeancarnews.com/2011/07/28/volkswagen-in-f1-by-2018/
* |publisher=European Car News |accessdate=28 July 2011 }}{{dead link|date=June
* 2016|bot=medic}}{{cbignore|bot=medic}}</ref> They did not compete in F1 in 2018.

===World Rally Championship===
* In 1981, now based in [[Hanover]], VW took a new direction into rallying, with the
* launch of the first-generation Golf, and Sweden's [[Per Eklund]], Frenchman
* [[Jean-Luc Thérier]], and the Finn [[Pentti Airikkala]]. The final chapters in
* Volkswagen Racing UK's rallying story were the 'one-make' Castrol Polo Challenge,
* and the Polo GTI 'Super 1600' in 2001.
* Volkswagen Motorsport won the [[World Rally Championship]] with [[Sébastien Ogier]]
* and co-driver [[Julien Ingrassia]] four years in a row from 2013 to 2016 in the
* [[Volkswagen Polo R WRC]].

===Dakar Rally===
* In 1980, Volkswagen competed with the Audi-developed [[Volkswagen Iltis|Iltis]],
* placing 1st, 2nd, 4th and 9th overall.
* In 2003, the Hanover-based team entered with a 2WD buggy named Tarek, finishing 6th
* overall and 1st in the 2WD and Diesel class. 
* In 2005, an updated Race-Touareg with slightly more power entered, with driver
* [[Bruno Saby]] finishing 3rd overall and 1st in the Diesel class. 
* In 2006, the revised Race-Touareg entered, with driver [[Giniel de Villiers]]
* finishing 2nd overall and 1st in the Diesel class. 
* Volkswagen won the [[2009 Dakar Rally|2009]], [[2010 Dakar Rally|2010]] and [[2011
* Dakar Rally]], held in South America.

===Volkswagen motorsport worldwide===
* Europe: In 1998 the company founded the ADAC Volkswagen Lupo Cup, founded in 1998
* (renamed Polo Cup in 2003, and [[Volkswagen Scirocco R-Cup]] from 2010 to 2014),
* and started the ADAC [[Volkswagen New Beetle|New Beetle]] Cup in 2000. In 2004,
* [[Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles]] entered the [[European Truck Racing]] series
* with the Volkswagen Titan truck&nbsp;– it became a back-to-back champion for the
* 2004 and 2005 series.
* United States: In 1976, Volkswagen entered the under-2000-cc [[Trans-Am Series]],
* with the Scirocco, and they won their class outright.<ref>{{cite
* web|url=http://img.photobucket.com/albums/v243/europlus/77sciroccotransam.jpg
* |title=Scirocco Trans Am Article/Advert |accessdate=27 September 2010}}</ref>
* Beginning in 2008 Volkswagen introduced the Jetta TDI Cup. The Jetta TDI Cup is a
* SCCA sanctioned race series that features 25 drivers between the ages of 16 and 26
* driving slightly modified 2009 Jetta TDIs. The series features 10 events at 8
* different road courses across North America. There is $50,000 prize money at stake
* over the course of the series in addition to the $100,000 prize awarded to the
* champion of the series at the conclusion of the last race.<ref>{{cite
* web|url=http://www.vw.com/vwbuzz/browse/en/us/detail/Twenty_two_drivers_qualify_for_2010_Volkswagen_Jetta_TDI_Cup_final_driver_selection_event/339
* |title=Twenty two drivers qualify for 2010 Volkswagen Jetta TDI Cup final driver
* selection event |website=VW.com |accessdate=22 December 2009 |deadurl=yes
* |archiveurl=https://web.archive.org/web/20100826224542/http://www.vw.com/vwbuzz/browse/en/us/detail/Twenty_two_drivers_qualify_for_2010_Volkswagen_Jetta_TDI_Cup_final_driver_selection_event/339
* |archivedate=26 August 2010 }}</ref>
* Argentina: Many Volkswagen models have competed in [[TC 2000]], including the 1980
* to 1983 champion [[Hillman Avenger#Argentina|Volkswagen 1500]] and the 1994
* champion [[Volkswagen Gol]].
* In 1999 and 2000, VW won the F2 Australian Rally Championship with the Golf GTI.
* Finland: In 2002, VW won the [[Finnish Rally Championship]] in a7/(F2), with a Golf
* Mk4 KitCar, with [[Mikko Hirvonen]]. In 1999 and 2000, VW won the Finnish Rally
* Championship in a7/(F2) with a Golf Mk3 KitCar. In 2000, 2001 and 2002, VW won the
* Finnish Racing Championship in Sport 2000 with a Golf Mk4.<ref>[[:de:Deutsche
* Tourenwagen Challenge|DTC]] {{de icon}}</ref>
* Austria: From 1967 until 1974, the Austrian sole distributor [[Porsche Salzburg]]
* entered the [[VW Beetle]] (1500, 1302S and 1303S) in Europe-wide rallies. Victories
* were achieved in 1972 and 1973 in the overall Austrian championship, on Elba, in
* the Acropolis rally (first in class). Top drivers were [[Tony Fall]] (GB), [[Achim
* Warmbold]] (D), Günter Janger (A), [[Harry Källström]](S).

<div class="center"><gallery>
File:VW Typ 60 K 10 - Porsche Typ 64 (Berlin-Rom-Wagen), Bj.1939.jpg|1939 Berlin to
Rome. Porsche Type 64 racer based on [[Volkswagen Beetle|Beetle]] platform
File:Volkswagen Beetle Fittipaldi-Baldahl 1967.jpg|Twin-engine racing [[Volkswagen
Beetle|Beetle]] developed by [[Wilson Fittipaldi Júnior|Wilson]] and [[Emerson
Fittipaldi]] brothers
File:TC2000 Sportteam Competicion 2006 Volkswagen Bora.jpg|[[Volkswagen Jetta|Bora]]
in [[TC 2000]], a national championship of Argentina
File:Stock Car V8 Brasil Amir Nasr Racing.jpg|[[Volkswagen Jetta|Bora]] in [[Stock
Car Brasil]]
File:VW Race Touareg 2 blue vl EMS.jpg|Edition 2007 Race [[Volkswagen Touareg|Touareg
2]] at Essen Motor Show 2006
File:Formula Truck 2006 Interlagos Volkswagen leads.jpg|[[Volkswagen
Constellation|Constellation]] in the 2006 Brazilian [[Fórmula Truck]] Championship
</gallery></div>

<!--

'''Volkswagen 2016'''

Despite the ongoing emissions scandal, VW's production for the first six months' of
2016 has been confirmed at 5,268,000 cars. Toyota produced 5,033,177 cars, while GM's
total figure has yet to be released, but is known to be smaller.[[citation
needed|date=June 2017]]

These figures change slightly when car sales are taken into account: Volkswagen Group
sold 5,199,000 cars, while Toyota sold 4,991,741 across its four brands: Toyota,
Lexus, Daihatsu and Hino. GM sold 4,760,000 cars in the same
period.[http://www.autocar.co.uk/car-news/new-cars/volkswagen-world%E2%80%99s-largest-car-maker-over-first-half-2016]

-->

== Literature ==
* Jonas Kiefer: ''VW Typenatlas, Serienfahrzeuge.'' 2. Auflage. Delius Klasing,
* Bielefeld 2002, {{ISBN|3-7688-1271-5}}.
* Rudi Heppe: ''VW Personenwagen.'' Podszun, Brilon 2001, {{ISBN|3-86133-209-4}}.
* Halwart Schrader: ''VW Personenwagen seit 1945, Band 1, Typenkompass.'' Motorbuch
* Verlag, Stuttgart 2001, {{ISBN|3-613-02105-6}}.
* Halwart Schrader: ''VW Personenwagen seit 1945, Band 2, Typenkompass.'' Motorbuch
* Verlag, Stuttgart 2001, {{ISBN|3-613-02186-2}}.
* Werner Oswald: ''Deutsche Autos, Band 2, 1920–1945.'' 2. Auflage. Motorbuch Verlag,
* Stuttgart 2005, {{ISBN|3-613-02170-6}}.
* Werner Oswald: ''Deutsche Autos, Band 3, 1945–1990, Ford, Opel und Volkswagen.'' 1.
* Auflage. Motorbuch Verlag, Stuttgart 2001, {{ISBN|3-613-02116-1}}.

==See also==
{{Portal|Germany|Cars|Companies}}
* [[Baja bug]]
* [[Cal Look]]
* [[Fahrvergnügen]]
* [[List of German cars]]
* [[List of automobile manufacturers]]
* [[Punch buggy]]
* [[Standard Superior]]&nbsp;– a previous attempt to produce a "Volkswagen"
* [[Steyr 50]]
* [[Twin Drive]]
* [[VDub]]&nbsp;– tagline for the recent VWoA Golf GTI TV advertisemen*
* [[Volksflugzeug]]
* [[Volksrod]]
* [[Volkswagen advertising history]]
* [[VW 276 Schlepperfahrzeug]], military use 1944

== Notes ==
{{Reflist|group=Note|colwidth=60em}}

== References ==
{{Reflist|30em|refs=
<ref name=Spiegel>{{cite web
|
url=http://www.spiegel.de/einestages/apple-starbucks-coca-cola-vw-firmenlogos-und-ihre-geschichte-a-1073926.html
| work=[[Der Spiegel]]
| title=Das machen wir mal lieber neu
| author=Christoph Stehr
| date=2 February 2016
| accessdate=7 February 2016
| language=German
}}</ref>
}}

== Further reading ==
* William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich (50th Anniversary Edition)
* (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1990)
* Andrea Hiott, Thinking Small (New York: Ballantine Books, 2012)

==External links==
{{Commons category multi|Volkswagen|Volkswagen vehicles}}
* [http://www.volkswagen.com/ Volkswagen.com] Volkswagen Cars Worldwide portal
* [http://www.volkswagen-classic.de/ Volkswagen Classic] {{de icon}}
* [http://www.thecaryoudrive.com/en/02175a425 Volkswagen Cars Technical Information]

{{Volkswagen Group brands}}
{{Volkswagen}}
{{Volkswagen (Europe) timeline 1980 to date}}
{{Volkswagen (North America) timeline 1980 to date}}
{{Volkswagen (South America) timeline 1980 to date}}
{{Automotive industry in Germany}}

{{Use British English|date=August 2010}}
{{Use dmy dates|date=October 2012}}

<!-- this Volkswagen brand vehicles company has its own category here. If you'd like
to add other VW brands, please add them to the Category:Volkswagen Group
instead—thanks. -->

[[Category:Volkswagen vehicles| ]]
[[Category:Volkswagen Group]]
[[Category:Car manufacturers of Germany]]
[[Category:Motor vehicle manufacturers of Germany]]
[[Category:Cars of Germany]]
[[Category:Electric vehicle manufacturers]]
[[Category:Motor vehicle companies]]
[[Category:Multinational companies headquartered in Germany]]
[[Category:Vehicle manufacturing companies established in 1937]]
[[Category:1937 establishments in Germany]]
[[Category:Companies based in Lower Saxony]]
[[Category:German brands]]
[[Category:Clio Award winners]]
[[Category:Wolfsburg]]
[[Category:Car brands]]

